It arrived out of nowhere with a roar, a rock ’n’ roll equivalent with a driving beat and crazed dancing. It was loud, brash and it was in your face, the scourge of the older generation and the anthem of rebellious youth:ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads“Charleston! Charleston!Made in Carolina…”The Roaring Twenties swept through Durban like nothing before. The killing fields of World War I were mass graves and the subsequent outbreak of the far more deadly Spanish Flu which killed up to 5% of the world’s population was over. Durban was ready to party. The world could afford to be silly as economic prosperity was everywhere, except in Germany of course, and so was change – there had been a paradigm shift in the way Durban and the rest of the Western world looked at life. Most importantly, this influence was not from Britain, it was from America, the new world power.Even Durban’s mayor was different from those who had come before. At school he had excelled academically. As a footballer, he was a brilliant halfback playing for the Victoria Football Club that drew with the famous Corinthians. He was the winner of seven gold and several silver medals for rowing. In yachting, as joint owner of the Zephyr, he won two prizes. Part 1: The Ghosts of Currie RoadHis name was Walter Gilbert and from 1922 to 1924, he was  mayor of Durban and he had a lot to do. Among other things, he co-ordinated the building of the Cenotaph, the World War l memorial. This was built in an art deco style, which for the time, was considered very modern. In 1923, he opened the Third National Conference of Indian Organisations in the Durban Town Hall, which formally established the SA Indian Congress with Umar Hajee Ahmed Jhaveri as its first president.Durban had changed considerably since the days when mayors such as George Payne and Sir Benjamin Greenacre were in office. But the big changes were social more than anything else and they were not of Durban’s making. How did the international phenomenon come about? Essentially, it was a reaction to the horrors of World War l. In 1917, its main forerunner, an aspirant writer about to go off to war, decided to write a book quickly in case he was killed before the world could acknowledge his genius. The book was “The Romantic Egotist” and, as it turned out, it was never published. The author wasn’t killed either but parts of the book were later incorporated into his debut novel, “This Side of Paradise”, which provided the blueprint for the lifestyle and morality of post World War l youth.The author was the American, F Scott Fitzgerald, and the success of the book famously helped him marry Zelda Sayres, Southern belle and original “It Girl” (confident trendsetter). Fitzgerald later went on to write “The Great Gatsby”, considered to be the most perfect novel written. After Fitzgerald’s death in 1941, a New York Times editorial said: “In the literary sense he invented a generation”. His debut novel was described as “The chronicler of the new post-war youth of America – of flappers, alcohol and the jazz age”. Initially an American rebellion, it quickly spread with poets, musicians, authors, fashion designers and anyone in search of halcyon days taking up the challenge of finding an even more hedonistic way of life. This time of pleasure seeking bordering on hysteria became a hallmark of the decade.The Kenilworth Tea Rooms, built around 1920 – one of Durban’s most popular entertainment centres – giving a clear view of the bathing enclosure. This fascinating picture shows Durban’s ‘café society’ of bathers and strollers, diners and turbaned waiters.It is said that a decade is defined by its art and so it was for the 1920s. Artists like Picasso and Matisse, in pursuit of modernism, left impressionism and were causing a shock with their rejection of traditional perspective. In architecture, art deco was on the rise – there are still buildings in Durban that reflect this very different style. Socially, automobiles, telephones, gramophones and motion pictures with big stars like Charlie Chaplin and Greta Garbo were having a huge impact. Silent movies were replaced by talkies – it was sensational! Part 2: Durban - The Shadows of EmpireDurban moved quickly with the times especially with the construction of cinemas like the old Alhambra at the bottom of Berea Road.Building construction had taken a different turn. In his Listing of Important Buildings in Durban, Professor Brian Kearney states how “the period between the world wars witnessed not only the phenomenon of greatest architectural change in Durban where traditional design values were swept aside by modern, international ideas but also an interesting continuation of the search for local appropriateness”. The period included the Berea Style, which was influenced by Spanish architecture, Art Deco and international styles. Large plots of land were sold off by the descendants of the “business barons of the Berea” and subdivided into small plots. Little houses with red tiled roofs lined newly cut lanes like Rorvik Avenue, off Musgrave Road.Another development was the building of blocks of flats like the art deco block, Surrey Mansions, in Currie Road. People who had been forced to stay in boarding houses, subject to the whims of sometimes cantankerous landladies, now had a choice.Radios were also available and provided entertainment and news updates. Another enormous change was the mass production of motor cars. This made the development of suburbs that were not near a railway line possible. It was not just the new Athlone Bridge that ensured the development of Durban North, it was the car. Free from the reliance on public transport, people could hop into their cars and head off to the  newly opened Shongweni Dam for a picnic, or drive to a nice spot on  the side of the road to watch the inaugural Comrades Marathon, or go to Mitchell Park to see Nellie the baby elephant, a gift from the Maharaja of Mysore in 1928 or drive somewhere just for fun.A smitten F Scott Fitzgerald and his wife Zelda on their wedding day in 1920. Did Fitzgerald really write his amazing novels including The Great Gatsby, or was Zelda somehow involved?Fun and more fun was in demand. A trip on one of the Union Castle ships from Durban to England and back was a must for a series of dances, games, late nights and booze-ups. Or you could try something simpler like a visit to Monkey Land at the Riverside Hotel across the new Athlone Bridge over the uMngeni River or simply take the ferry to the whaling station for something different.Music, often jazz, floated in and out of every café and tearoom in Durban, including the Kenilworth Tea Rooms that looked out onto the bathing enclosure which had been rebuilt after its partial destruction in the great storm of 1917. The Kenilworth Tea Rooms, built around 1920, was one of Durban’s most popular entertainment centres where you could find Durban’s “café society” of bathers and strollers, diners and turbaned waiters, the unseen who became visible only on cue, in Durban’s social whirl but not of it.Bathing costumes were also changing as were the outfits, especially for young ladies or “flappers” as they were called. The view from the Kenilworth Tea Rooms kept getting better and better. Hemlines were rising, red nail varnish was popular and hair was bobbed. Cloche hats were all the rage. For a night out at the theatre, a ball or a cocktail party, the 1920s Durban girl took on the look of the “slinky vamp”, her dress sparkling. But behind this social revolution, another revolution was under way. Trade union activity was on the rise in South Africa and this rapidly moved into the political arena partly due to the ANC going through a weak period. In Durban, the Industrial and Commercial Workers Union (ICU) was powerful. The ICU had been formed by Clements Kadalie from Nyasaland (Malawi) but a newcomer, George Champion, had arrived on the scene and was challenging him for the ICU leadership in Natal. According to Edward Roux in his book “Time Longer than a Rope”: “Early in 1928, Kadalie took the bull by the horns but the bull proved too strong for him. “Kadalie found his facility as an orator in English of little avail against Champion’s appeals to the Zulus in their native tongue.” Not since the victorious cries of “Usuthu! Usuthu!” at Isandlwana in 1879 during the Anglo-Zulu War had the Zulu nation felt any sense of unity and pride but now, through the moulding of its communities by trade unions and other organisations into a political force, the “Spirit of the Great Heart”, silent for so long, had begun to beat once more. In America, life for the Fitzgeralds did not turn out as they expected. Zelda is on record as having said: “Plagiarism begins at home!” Did Fitzgerald really write his amazing novels all by himself or was someone else somehow involved? Zelda had often been written off as the one who caused Fitzgerald’s drinking, the one who brought about his downfall, the Delilah who destroyed a great Samson of literature but this was not the case. Fitzgerald did lift some of the brilliant ideas and passages from Zelda’s letters and diaries which then mysteriously disappeared!In the end, they died prematurely, Fitzgerald from excessive drinking. Zelda spent her later years in and out of sanatoriums, finally being burnt to death when she became trapped in the Highland Hospital when it caught fire in 1948. Inscribed on their tombstone is the final sentence of The Great Gatsby: “So we beat on, boats against the current, borne back ceaselessly into the past.”Indenture in South Africa: Rethinking the movement of peopleBut, for Durban too, something had to spoil this never-to-be-repeated decade of fun. The destruction of the bathing enclosure by another storm in 1928 was a bad omen. A perfect global storm was forming and when it struck, it was too late for warnings. On October 29, 1929, investors in New York were jumping off tall buildings and soon, men were in the streets singing sad songs like Buddy Can You Spare a Dime? to get money to buy bread. The well-heeled, many with a callous disregard for the poor, often became poor themselves. The Great Depression had arrived. And in Germany a not so funny little corporal with a Charlie Chaplin moustache was experiencing record sales of his book, Mein Kampf (My Struggle).The Roaring Twenties continued for a while as the clinking glasses, the shimmering dresses and the driving beat of the Charleston were slowly absorbed by the roar of the ocean on Durban’s Golden Mile. The strains of the music, I’m gonna Charleston back to Charleston Carolina, became fainter and fainter as they drifted inexorably towards the darkness and despair of the Depression.** Catherine Greenham is a teacher and published author of the novel, "Rebellion". Michael Greenham is a chartered accountant and lecturer. Together they have a great interest in history, particularly Durban history. They live in Currie Road in an Edwardian home, and have a large collection of books on history and English Literature as well as old Durban postcards which they use to illustrate their articles