IN THE WORDS of Leonard Rosenberg, a co- author of Dirty Linen, “Old palm and mango trees and the closed-off North Street sit within a desolate, fenced landscape, the only reminders of the turmoil and destruction of a community that once inhabited this space. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads“It has become Durban’s ‘monument’ to the infamous forced removals system.” What had once been a thriving, multiracial village with a long history going back to Durban’s marshland days, is no more.Where did this community come from?It is no longer apparent but, in Durban’s earliest years, the Western Vlei (present-day Greyville Racecourse and surrounds) and the Eastern Vlei (the area around present day Kings Park) formed huge marshy wastelands. Umgeni Road and the land around it divided the two. It became known as Greyville after Sir George Grey, a governor of the Cape. However, the area was low-lying and considered unhealthy. It was therefore “ideal” for Durban’s hoi polloi leaving the higher, healthier and cooler lands of the upper Berea available for the exclusive use of those who were  better off.Nevertheless, life in Greyville was pleasant enough with its schools, hotels, churches and railway station contributing to its village atmosphere. Subdivisions had begun in the 1880s. The houses were well built. Some properties were small but the cottages built on them, often of wood and iron, were so quaint that it made lanes like Campbell Avenue appear to be from a fairy tale. On the “other side of the tracks” were the Indian barracks and a powder magazine in Depot Road (later Somtseu). Greyville was a predominantly white area although some Indian families had moved into Umgeni Road as early as 1900.Two prominent roads in Greyville were Avondale and Clarence named in memory of Prince Albert Victor, Duke of Clarence and Avondale and grandson of Queen Victoria. He was associated with stories and rumours in London. Some authors argued that he was Jack the Ripper. Whatever the case, in 1892 at the age of 28, he died of syphilis.The Queen’s Tavern was built in 1894 as a gentlemen’s club and named after the Queen’s Own Regiment, the 2nd Battalion, which was stationed nearby. Greyville was also the home of the Queen’s Tavern, built in 1894 as a gentlemen’s club. It consisted of a foyer with a pressed steel ceiling, a billiard room, a smoking room, a staff room and several outbuildings. It was named after the Queen’s Own Regiment – the 2nd Battalion was stationed nearby.The Greyville Infant School, which later became Clarence Road, opened in 1905 and 300 children attended. Nearby in Mitchell Road the Greyville Government School also opened. Both schools exist today.When the roaring 202 hit DurbanGreyville was an area where “night-soil lanes” were commonplace. The lanes typically had no names and came in handy in the days before  waterborne sewerage. They were the domain of the “dustman” who could unobtrusively use them to cart off the contents of the privies at night without having to lug it all down the main street in full view of everyone.It was a happy enough place but even in the 1920s there were signs of problems ahead. At the infant school, one of its logbooks speaks about “much poverty and disease” and “the wretched home conditions of many of the pupils”.Nevertheless, life continued. On race days, Greyville bustled with visitors from everywhere descending on its hotels and bottle stores. And when things were a little quieter there was always the cinema, not the ones in town but the one at 201 First Avenue called The Avenue Cinema near the Queen’s tavern. It was a wood and iron building with a sandy floor. The black and white silent movies were enlivened by a pianist who would tinkle away through the happy bits and then pound the keys ominously when danger drew near. During the 1930s, the demographics, particularly in the North Street and First Avenue area, had changed and a generation later almost all properties were Indian-owned. Whites lived there but often as tenants of Indian landlords. Shops were owned and operated by Indian, Greek, Portuguese, Syrian and Chinese traders – all very cosmopolitan. However, the area had fallen foul of the Slums Act. Durban had 12 declared slum zones of which areas Z2 and Z3 were within Greyville.The Drill Hall for the Durban Light Infantry soon after it was constructed. The postcard was dated 1906. The building stands today in DLI Avenue at the edge of the Greyville Racecourse.The official explanation is that the railway yards grew larger as Durban’s needs expanded and with it, the light industry as the city got larger. As this happened, the area  became less and less desirable and inhabited more and more by people who were struggling to keep going. This was compounded by the Group Areas Act of 1950. Who would want to spend money on a building only to have it expropriated?Buildings fell into disrepair and overcrowding was evident. Homes sometimes became boarding houses with one room per family. Most of this happened in the wake of World War ll. Absent fathers had created single-mother situations. Children were often left to fend for themselves by day. Just as the Teddy Boys emerged in England at this time, so the Ducktails emerged in South Africa, with Greyville being a perfect gang breeding ground.Durban: The shadows of empireIn the end, parts of Grey- ville had become multiracial and for that, more than any other reason, it was damned. Political ideology trumped  the de facto situation. It was easy to declare an area a slum and a slum was also a convenient way of condemning a  multiracial area.It has to be remembered that, while it was not like the Musgrave Road area, Greyville functioned. According to Rosenberg: “Ex-resident Mohammed Vahed, who was born and bred in Greyville, remembers his neighbourhood as a vibrant, multicultural and multiracial community where a strong community spirit prevailed and Eid, Diwali and Christmas were celebrated by all. The streets were abuzz with soccer, cricket, hop-scotch and ‘Gillie-Danda’ games (like tip and run).”For Greyville, the old ways were coming to an end. In the 1970s the residences in Block AK (between First Avenue and Mitchell Crescent) were demolished. The destruction as well as that in surrounding areas ripped the heart out of Greyville. New investment was subsequently made like the Independent Media offices, the Standard Bank Building and Game City Centre which, as commercially important as they were, hardly contributed to village life.Village life might have been over, but not the memories of those who were evicted and who watched as their homes were destroyed. Vahed’s family home was in First Avenue next to Ranch’s Hotel. He recalls the fateful day: “It was a very emotional period when the bulldozers started bulldozing homes. Everyone cried together because we all felt like one large family.” It is the memories that live on, locking away facets of life, these things that make us laugh and cry. Like the aroma of a mother’s breyani cooking at dinner time, the girl singing while she skips, the boy on the mango tree swing and a father coming home from work every day at dusk still believing, believing in a better future.Somehow, through the untiring efforts of its owner, Peter Noel-Barham, as well as Professor Barend van Niekerk, an important campaigner for Durban’s old buildings, the Queen’s Tavern building survived but not the restaurant. The days of washing your hands with rose-scented water at the dinner table were over.In the Queen’s Tavern today, the faces of Holbein, Haydn, Titian, Tennyson and Raleigh, framed by exquisite patterns in windows of stained glass, remind us of more prosperous days. The faces look out but  not at the officers of the Queen’s Own Regiment in all their finery. Nor do the faces look upon diners from all race groups eating together in a restaurant offering the finest in Indian cuisine.No, today the faces ignore shoppers searching for bargains in what is a second- hand store and, instead, gaze wistfully across the road at a village that once was but is a dystopian wasteland, where real people lived in a once  real world.● Catherine Greenham is a teacher and published author of the novel Rebellion. Michael Greenham is a chartered accountant and lecturer. Together they have a great interest in history, particularly Durban history. They live in Currie Road in an Edwardian home and have a large collection of books on history and English literature as well as old Durban postcards which they use to illustrate their articles.