Living close to family members or friends you know well can make you physically healthier and help you age more slowly. This revelation came in a new study by scientists from the universities of East Anglia and Leeds in the UK, and Groningen in The Netherlands. The research showed that birds in areas where they had more relatives or familiar neighbours were in better condition than birds who were loners.  You might wonder how this was assessed. You can’t exactly interview birds about their neighbourly relations. What the scientists did was to measure the birds’ telomeres. You remember those shoelace-like markers of ageing. Long telomeres are good and short ones are bad, in terms of longevity. Birds have telomeres too, and when things don’t go well in the “hood” their telomeres suffer. This study revealed that when new neighbours moved in, long-time residents’ telomeres got shorter. The birds that these scientists studied were Seychelles warblers, a small African bird endemic to the Indian Ocean islands east  of Kenya. The relevance of this scientific investigation to me and you is that such avian neighbourly behaviour is said to similarly occur among human beings. Now I’m used to taking lessons from mice. I’ve come to accept that findings  from scientific research among lab rats are applicable to people. However, I can’t remember a study on bird life that was extrapolated to human behaviour.“The results show just how important keeping good neighbours can be,” crowed the study’s authors. “Interestingly, we show that it’s not just relatives that can be trusted, but also neighbours you get to know well over time.”Well, this is the first time I’ve learnt a life lesson from a feathered friend. Not that I’m bothered  by the fact that the study was of birds rather than rats. I get it that good neighbourliness can have health benefits, and that this can apply across species. Lead author of the research Kat Bebbington compared these findings among birds with interactions in human neighbourhoods. “If you’ve lived next to your neighbour for years,” she explained, “you are much more likely to trust each other and help each other out.”What concerns me is this emphasis on neighbours. When we all know the old saying about not being able to choose them.Neighbours are those – whether bird or human – who happen to live where you live. You cannot pre-select neighbours to suit your taste. Other than proximity, they don’t necessarily have anything in common with you. If they do, it’s pure coincidence. There is little you can do to improve your situation, neighbour-wise.Now such neighbourhood-focused research is being applied to ageing. I fear that it may spark despair and despondency among those of us who are not lucky enough to have neighbours who improve our health to the point that it slows our ageing.A preferred living model for older adults is known as “ageing in place”. Sure, but it depends on what the place is like. Which brings us back to that factor over which we have little or no control: your neighbours and what they are like.Another study, by researchers at the University of Michigan, found that living in a tight-knit neighbourhood lowered the risk of stroke among adults 50 years and older. Well, that vibe is nice if you can get it, but not everyone can. Not all older people – or older birds, I’d wager – live in neighbourhoods so chilled that it lowers their blood pressure.Yet another study, by the Rush Alzheimer’s Disease Centre in Chicago, showed that the rate of cognitive decline was 70% less in people with frequent social contact, compared with those with little social interaction. Socially active people were shown to have 43% less disability than those who stick to  themselves.Who doesn’t want to have a great social life, in their own neighbourhood, with great neighbours? The problem is that the whole concept  of neighbourliness is not the same as it was in the past.“It’s a different feeling when your doorbell rings today, as opposed to 20 years ago.” That’s how Italian-American comedian Sebastian Maniscalco opens his stand-up routine. He explains that back then, when  your doorbell rang, it was a happy moment in the house. Everyone rushed to the door, without hesitation.Years ago there was an expectation that people would pop in. And what did they say when you answered the door? “I was in the neighbourhood, so I thought I’d drop by.”“Now your doorbell rings, you turn and ask your family, ‘Did you invite anybody over?’” the comedian continues. “You can’t stop by anybody’s house any more. If you do, you have to call from the driveway: ‘I’m here, can I approach?’” These days, even if your neighbours are friendly, they rarely come unannounced.* Visit the blog, My New Old Self: What to do next for the rest of my life, at www.mynewoldself.com and on Facebook, and follow @mynewoldself on Twitter.