Critically low water levels at the Albert Falls Dam – which is decreasing at the rate of 1% per fortnight – could worsen if above-average rainfall does not fall in the necessary catchment areas. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Corporate stakeholder manager for Umgeni Water Shami Harichunder told The Mercury that the dam – the largest in Umgeni Water’s operational area – remained critically low at 20%. 
“The current level illustrates the impact of scarce good rains in the catchments of Albert Falls. It provides a significant amount of Durban’s water needs.”
Water restrictions, he said, would remain during the coming holiday season.
"An appeal is being made to consumers in Durban, Pietermaritzburg and uMgungundlovu, including visitors to these cities, to be mindful of current restrictions and to use water sparingly.”
Water resources in Umgeni Water’s other systems – Hazelmere, South Coast and Ixopo – had improved significantly after the rains of 10 days ago, he said.
As at Tuesday, Hazelmere Dam was at 108% while further north, iMvutshane Dam in Maphumulo was at 100%. 
He said there was sufficient water available to meet the full demand of eThekwini that supplies Verulam, Waterloo, La Mercy and Sea Tides.
Photo by Luis Tosta on Unsplash

“There is also abundant water for iLembe District Municipality to supply Ballito, Umhlali, parts of Ndwedwe and Maphumulo.”
On the South Coast, Umzinto, Nungwane, EJ Smith and Mhlabatshane dams are overflowing. 
“There are no concerns over water shortages occurring despite the possibility of increased consumption during the Christmas/New Year periods.”
In Ixopo, the local Home Farm Dam was at 105% on Tuesday. 
“(This dam) supplies the town of Ixopo and surrounding areas and at its current level, it has sufficient water available to meet the full needs of Harry Gwala District Municipality.”


As at Tuesday (November 28, 2017), levels of dams in the Mgeni system were:

Mearns: 65% (this dam has risen by 13% after rains of 10 days ago)Spring Grove: 76% (the level of this dam has remained unchanged from a week ago)Midmar: 76% (the level of this dam has risen by 1% as a result of water transfers into it from Spring Grove)Albert Falls: 20% (the level of this dam has remained unchanged from a week ago and it has remained consistently under 30% for a year)Nagle: 74% (some good rains in its catchments have resulted in the level of this dam increasing by 6% from 10 days ago)Inanda: 60% (there has been 1% increase in the level of this dam as a result of moderate rainfall 10 days ago)

The Mercury