UberEATS is expanding its reach in Durban and surrounding areas. This was confirmed by SA’s operation manager for UberEATS, Ailyssa Pretorius, at the official launch that was held at the Botanic Gardens last Friday. For now, Durbanites can request food for delivery in Durban North, uMhlanga, Morningside and the Ballito area, seven days a week, for a delivery fee of R20, regardless of the size of the order from 10am to 10pm.UberEATS is an online meal ordering and delivery platform that was launched in South Africa recently.Some of the restaurants available currently include: RocoMamas, McDonald’s, Afro’s chicken, KFC, Spiga, Smokin’ Joe’s, Spur, Barbecue Tonight, Shawarma Club, Pop-up Society, Café Dior, John Dory’s and Distillery 031. Dozens are being added as the service takes off in the city. Browsing through the UberEATS app, I found out that people who have a restricted diet do not yet have options. There are no restaurants in certain areas that serve vegetarian, vegan and gluten-free food on the service, as yet.  It does though appear that the app is still glitchy for some users too, including me. I tried ordering a meal (Afro’s chicken strips and tjips), but experienced some glitches. I ordered and put everything in the cart and only had a problem with the code verification, that the app needs to confirm my order.  But it seems like I was not the only one having a problem with UberEATS as screenwriter and critic Sihle Mthembu took to Twitter and said: “UberEATS has been delaying for so long I am now making noodles.  “An hour and a half waiting, food not picked up. Is this the level of service we should expect?” I





In response to the launch of UberEATS in Durban, Mr. Delivery has lowered its delivery price, from R35 to R15.  If you are in Durban and will be using UberEATS for the first time, you can use the code “HELLODURBS” to enjoy a free delivery for three orders, which is valid for two weeks. UPDATE: UberEATS announced a few minutes ago that they have dropped the delivery price from R20 to R10. This is possibly after Mr. D lowered their delivery price to R15.