The Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) shut down ten illegal liquor outlets and issued fines worth R15 000 during an enforcement operation at the weekend.
Thirty five outlets ranging from taverns, shebeens, restaurants and distributors in Durban North, Phoenix, Tongaat and Verulam, said the department in statement, were targeted.
“(It) was organised by the DTI, the South African Police Service (SAPS), Ethekwini municipality, KwaZulu-Natal Liquor Board, Department of Agriculture and Forestry and Department of Social Development with an objective to curbing illegal trading of liquor, creating an awareness on the effects of drugs and alcohol abuse and ensuring that licence holders comply with the conditions,” said the department in a statement.
“Twelve illegal traders were issued with fines for non-compliance to the value of R15 000 and 10 illegal liquor outlets that were closed down with 1 275 litres of liquor confiscated.”
During the operation, they said, three arrests had been made for murder, possession of dagga and for illegal connection of electricity.
READ: Alcohol abuse costs SA billions
Acting Director of the National Liquor Authority at the DTI Dirk Aspeling said that the operations were aimed at reducing the socioeconomic and other cost of alcohol abuse, and to negated the impact of contact crimes.
“The unannounced operations are key in ensuring distributors are selling liquor to licenced persons or entities. The department is still facing the challenges in regulating liquor as registrants continue to trade after the licence has been cancelled or do not comply with their registration conditions. In order to address this challenge, we will have to review licence conditions and registrants may stand to lose their licences as government will not tolerate non adherence to the law,” said Aspeling.
READ: How alcohol contributes to violence against women
This festive season, they said, government had to broaden the inspections in order to include education, and to create awareness around substance abuse for the operation to have more impact and yield results. 
“KwaZulu-Natal was targeted because it is one of the provinces with the highest rate of alcohol and drug abuse in the country.”
The Mercury