Durban - Unstable leadership, under-resourcing and low conviction rates were some of the challenges that emerged during the portfolio committee on police’s recent oversight visit to KwaZulu-Natal.
On Tuesday, acting provincial commissioner Major-General Bheki Langa presented a report back in response to the recommendations made by the committee after their visits in late July and early August.
The committee had visited police stations and specialised units, including the Public Order Police (POP) and Tactical Response Team in Pietermaritzburg, the National Intervention Unit and Glebelands Hostel.
The annual crime statistics last month showed that violent crime – including murder, hijackings and robberies – was on the rise in KZN and analyst for the Institute for Security Studies Dr Johan Burger said at the time that part of the problem was instability within the police leadership.
Among the committee’s recommendations was that the SAPS appoint a permanent provincial commissioner in KZN “as soon as possible”.
However, Major-General Langa has been acting in the post since Lieutenant- General Mmamonnye Ngo- beni’s suspension on full pay in May last year. Ngobeni’s suspension was over allegations that uMhlanga businessman Thoshan Panday had paid for a lavish surprise birthday party for her husband, Brigadier Lucas Ngobeni.
Some months later, the Durban High Court overturned her suspension. But the police are appealing against this in the Supreme Court of Appeal and therefore her suspension remains in place. 
The SAPS said on Tuesday that the post was “temporarily vacant” and could not be filled under the circumstances.
But Dianne Kohler Barnard, the DA’s spokesperson on police, said “when you have acting heads, things start slipping”. And the former head of the Hawks in KZN, Major-General Johan Booysen, said it was “eroding stability”.
“Having an acting provincial commissioner running a volatile province like KZN for almost two years shows a lack of commitment,” he said.
In terms of localised leadership, it has emerged that almost 30 station commanders in KZN have not yet attended the six-week station management learning programme.
The committee recommended that the SAPS provide training and mentoring support to all station commanders in KZN and in response to this, police said on Tuesday that 28 station commanders in the province had yet to attend the programme. They said these officers would be prioritised for training next year, but that the province was only allocated two seats per course.
Kohler Barnard said on Tuesday that having unqualified officers as station commanders was unacceptable and she had written to the minister requesting the number of station commanders who were actually qualified.
One of the other challenges is a lack of resources. The committee on Tuesday admitted that the police’s focus on building capacity in specialised units was placing a burden on police stations.
They also admitted that “almost all police stations in KZN, as in other provinces, are resourced below their minimum requirement”.
“Note that specialised units are being capacitated and new ones established, under stringent constraints. The SAPS does not have an additional budget for additional staffing and such capacity is taken away from police stations in the main,” they said. “The consequence of such capacity-building is opening a staffing gap at police stations.”
Booysen said on Tuesday that senior officers within the force predicted such an outcome, when specialised units – including the murder and robbery, vehicle theft, narcotics and child protection units – were shut down in 2004.
“The theory was that they were capacitating the stations. But we said they were going to be diluting their skills set. And that was what happened.”
In response to the committee’s recommendation that low conviction and detection rates at provincial and station level be tackled, police outlined a turnaround strategy. 
This prioritised improving investigation, regular age analysis and auditing of undetected dockets from the archives, as well as minimising the closure of the dockets as undetected and withdrawn.
It also called for special attention to be paid to ensuring continuous updating of data in the system.
The Mercury