DURBAN - &nbsp;WITH thousands expected to flock to Durban ahead of the glamorous Durban July event on Saturday, authorities in KwaZulu-Natal have warned against lawlessness on the roads.&nbsp; The Department of Transport has called on motorists to be extra cautious as they make their way to Durban ahead of the horse-racing spectacle to be held at the Greyville Racecourse on Saturday. More than 50 000 people are expected to pack into Greyville, in beautifully decorated marquees, private boxes and on the main stands, where they will be served with expensive drinks and fine dining throughout the day.&nbsp;Transport MEC Mxolisi Kaunda said they were expecting the N2 and N3 highways to be busy and an integrated law enforcement team comprising the Road Traffic Inspectorate (RTI), eThekwini's Metro Police and the South African Police Service, would be out in their numbers to deal with errant road behaviour. &nbsp;&nbsp;Kaunda said roadblocks had begun from Thursday night and would be rolling on until Sunday. He said this was part of the department's Closing the Ranks Campaign , which focuses on increasing law enforcement overnight and on weekends.Last year, more than 27 000 cars passed the national toll plazas heading towards Durban, and the department expects the same this year.&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp; The Vodacom Durban July is now a well-known event, attracting tens of thousands of tourists into our province and Durban specifically. &nbsp;We welcome them and appreciate their patronage, as it contributes to our economic growth,&quot; said Kaunda.&nbsp;&quot;Furthermore, I wish to emphasise that all road users including motorists, bikers, cyclists and pedestrians, should exercise caution and strictly respect road traffic rules and signs to ensure that we prevent road crashes and fatalities. &nbsp;We reiterate that road safety is our collective responsibility ; which calls on each and every one of us to play to play our part in saving lives on the road. &nbsp;&quot;Finally, we wish to reaffirm that road users, including pedestrians, drivers, cyclists, and bikers, must at all times be vigilant and desist from indulging in drinking alcoholic beverages before or during their trips. All those found to have broken the law shall face the full might of the law, said Kaunda.&nbsp;Caro Smit, the founder of South Africans Against Drunk Driving (SADD) warned motorists to use cabs and app-based meter services like Uber after consuming alcohol to avoid road accidents. It is not worth drinking and driving because police will catch you. If you do that you are a bloody idiot who can be held responsible for killing people when involved in an accident. It is better to get a taxi cab or Uber after few drinks to get home safe. Do not take a chance one glass of champagne or wine can ruin your life, she said.Click here to Follow the Sunday Tribune on TwitterOr Click here if you prefer to like the Tribune on FacebookSUNDAY TRIBUNE