The home side loved the inaugural rugby match at Moses Mabhida Stadium last week and the venue’s management reported “fantastic feedback”.
But spectators who spoke to The Independent on Saturday after the South Africa 'A'  versus French Barbarians match were less full of praise, especially when it came to talking about the distance between them, in their seats, and the game on the field.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

“I sat in the seventh row, in what I assume was the main grandstand. I felt the game was too far away for me,” said Tracey Petzer.

“I could only see properly when the players were in front of me. Basically I could see a quarter of the field, if that. The rest of the time I was constantly watching the big screen.”

Peter Rodseth suggested that if the much talked-about possibility of the Sharks moving to Moses Mabhida Stadium from Kings Park came to fruition, he would become a lounge spectator.

“Everything about the new stadium was great except the one thing that counts: the viewing experience. It was awful. I was in a box and would have been far better at home watching on TV,  which is what I will do if rugby moves there.”

Brett Magree didn’t threaten to become home-bound, but said he would return to Moses Mabhida better equipped.

“I guess it would be okay to watch rugby there again... if I take my binoculars.”

His teenage son, Kian, was more upbeat about the Youth Day event, but his comment also contained a bit of criticism for the stadium as a rugby venue.

“The vibe where we sat was excellent. It almost felt like the Sevens Rugby in Cape Town. Because of the athletics track between spectators and the pitch, there was limited visibility. The players were too far away.”

However, Kian was full of compliments about the abundance of legroom in the seating at Moses Mabhida Stadium.

South Africa A  coach Johan Ackermann, whose team won 48-28, said they enjoyed playing at Moses Mabhida Stadium.

“There was a good atmosphere and the crowd actually helped in the end. We came together well as a squad.” 

General manager of the stadium Vusi Mazibuko said he had received “fantastic feedback from the Youth Day rugby match which attracted a crowd of about 9000 people. 

“I believe we have demonstrated that this stadium could indeed be one of the venues listed in the 2023 Rugby World Cup bid,” he said.
 THE INDEPENDENT ON SATURDAY