KwaZulu-Natal has rallied in aid of the people of the fire-ravaged Southern Cape, collecting food, supplies and money and offering their services. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
At the weekend, five members of Ballito’s Specialised Rescue Unit drove to Knysna with a food trailer to help feed and hydrate some of the 800 firefighters battling the multiple blazes in the southern Cape town. 
Team member Carmen Power said their experienced rescue volunteers, Brett Michielin, Kyle Meyer, Louis Kotze, Dean Fletcher and Johan Muller are also ready to deal with evacuations if the need arises. 
The team took along donated bedding, blankets, food and water. As they are able to prepare meals in the trailer they can serve hot meals to firefighters. 
“The situation is very bad, there is lots of soot and smoke, our team had to wear respiratory masks,” said Power. 
The unit is also aiming to raise R30 000 to buy new uniforms and school supplies for children who lost their belongings in the fires. 
Among those who had to be evacuated due to the fires was Hlengiwe Maziya, formerly of Richards Bay.
Maziya, who said she and her family were staying in a community hall, said her family had been so worried, they wanted them to come home when they heard about the fire.
“We heard the roads are closed and our lives are here; we can’t just leave, we will rebuild when this is over,” she said. 
Meanwhile, the Rotary Clubs in KZN were also aiming to raise R500 000 towards the rebuilding of homes destroyed. 
More than 600 formal and informal structures have been destroyed along the Garden Route. 
President of the uMhlanga Club Lisa Sukdev said that over and above this effort by all the clubs in the province theirs was also collecting non-perishables.
“We have trolleys at the Spar at Gateway and uMhlanga Centre. We are really encouraging people to bring along clothing, non-perishables, toiletries, sealed water and mattresses. We will then arrange for these to be sent to Knysna and the Western Cape where they will be distributed on the ground.”
Pietermaritzburg-based Gift of the Givers said it had set up a field hospital following the precautionary shutdown of Knysna Provincial Hospital.
The group said the hospital would be manned by 13 medical specialists over and above the nine emergency services personnel already on the ground. 
“The team will provide services to the people of Knysna, George, Plettenberg Bay, Buffels Bay and wherever they are placed by the military. Gift of the Givers will bring in additional equipment and supplies at our cost and if, necessary, additional medical specialists of various disciplines.”
Abed Karrim, national co-ordinator for disaster response with Estcourt-based non-governmental organisation Al-Imdaad Foundation, said a team was on its way to Knysna. 
They would join teams from the Western and Eastern Cape who were already assisting, mainly in an informal settlement. 
Al-Imdaad teamed up with Operation SA providing hygiene packs, food, blankets and mattresses for firefighters and the displaced. 
The Mercury