The eThekwini Municipality says a massive billboard overlooking the N2 highway is a road safety hazard and it has taken its fight to the courts to have it taken down.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
In court papers it says the billboard is a distraction for drivers and compromises safety on the freeway.
“The billboard, which comprises the sign and the advertisement displayed therefrom, constitutes a road safety hazard… The distracting effects of advertising creates a hazard,” the municipality’s chief legal adviser, Clement Xulu, said in papers filed in the Durban High Court. He said the problem was that the N2 was an “extremely busy highway”.
“The portion of the N2 from which the sign is visible is an unusually complex and dangerous traffic area,” he said. “The main purpose of the billboard is to attract the attention of motorists on the N2… The two advertising frames are clearly intended to provide for advertisements visible to motorists travelling in both a northerly, either on the onramp or on the mainstream N2, as well as those travelling in a southerly direction on the N2”.
Erected in Newlands West on the northbound side of the N2 in 2007, Xulu described the billboard as “a substantial structure that literally towers over adjacent buildings (and) is several storeys high”.
“It is supported by a huge monopole and has frames for two advertising faces which are illuminated by electric floodlights,” Xulu said. “Advertisements, or what I understand are called advertising ‘flights’, are displayed from the advertising faces of the billboard in a manner so as to be visible from public places, and in particular the N2 highway, a national road, and Lakedale Place, a public road”.
Xulu said that in terms of the city’s by-laws, nobody could erect an advertisement or sign, visible from a public place, without the written permission of the city engineer and advertisements or signs which interfered with, or might cause a danger to, traffic were prohibited.
He said that when the billboard was erected, it was done without the municipality’s permission. Two years ago, he said, a “signage application” was submitted to the municipality but it was refused.
After an attempt to appeal against the city’s decision had failed, Xulu said, the advertising agency Ad Outpost was asked to take it down. But to date it remained up and so the municipality had approached the courts.
Ad Outpost, however, is not taking the litigation lying down and plans to challenge the constitutionality of the by-laws it stands accused of flouting.
In its court papers, the agency said the grounds for such a challenge included that the by-laws regulated the contents of advertisements by restricting the content of what could be advertised, infringing on commercial free speech.
“Insofar as the by-laws do not regulate contents, it is a duplication of the National Building Regulations Act and has been superseded by the said Act and renders the by-laws invalid in terms of the said Act,” the agency said. 
“The wide discretionary power afforded the city engineer is unconstitutional as it infringes on the principles of legality,” it said. “The wide discretionary power of the city engineer coupled with the prohibition in Section 2 of the by-laws, renders the by-laws a blanket ban on third party outdoor advertising”.
The matter came before Judge Mokgere Masipa last week. The matter was adjourned to October.
The Mercury