HE WAS a doyen. A legend. He didn’t suffer fools easily. But beneath that lanky, steely exterior was a charismatic, colourful, caring and flamboyant lensman who rose from penury to reach the pinnacle of photojournalism.
Ranjith Kally (Kallicharan), who died on Tuesday at his daughter Jyoti Michael’s Joburg home, while recuperating from a hip injury following a fall, lived a life worthy of celebration.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

At 91 (he would have turned 92 on November 26), he had seen and done it all.

In the process, he created memories. Nostalgic ones. Everlasting ones. 

In black and white and in colour, his skills as a photographer were weaned from an original box camera, which he bought on an auction, while working in a shoe factory in Isipingo, close to his then Reunion home.

That he had an eye for detail and, of course, for any other subject, including beauty pageant participants, politicians and sports stars, soon became evident as his pictures ignited newspaper pages, usually up front and in the sports section, dedicated mostly to soccer in the SASL and FPL.  

I had the pleasure of working with Ranjith when I joined the Natal edition of the Golden City Post on April 1, 1969, then edited by another stalwart, Bobby Harrypersadh, and staffed by a vibrant team, among whom were Ismail (IA) Khan, Rajendra Chetty, MS Roy (Sidhumbaran Pillay), Devan Moodley, Amos Ngoma and later Farook Khan, among others.

After finding my feet at the Golden City Post, I was sent on assignments with Ranjith, who by now had earned his spurs as a top-flight and popular cameraman, which made cracking difficult stories that much easier as his presence and aura helped as an ice-breaker. 

However, it was no easy ride with Ranjith, as he drove like a demon, Schumacher-style, to get to distant places (fortunately, we escaped speed traps!) in our quest for editorial scoops and pictures. 

It was on these assignments to far-flung places such as Ramsgate on the South Coast, Pietermaritzburg, Winterton, Ladysmith, Glencoe and Dundee in the Midlands, and  Shakaskraal, Stanger and Richards Bay in the north, in our plus-10-year association, that I discovered another side of this legend.

He insisted on paying for our meals (I doubt he sought or got reimbursed) and dug deep into his pockets to dole out cash to impoverished families.   

When we headed to Pietermaritzburg to cover political and other trials, and stories, Ranjith, a horse-racing fan, would stop at the luxury Kloof home of the legendary Syd Laird family to pass on pictures. 

I do know that he also shared a cosy relationship with that great jockey of yesteryear Bertie Hayden and another horseman, Robert Sievewright. 

And while we were on some assignments, Ranjith constantly reminded me of deadlines, but, in truth, he also wanted to build in time to practise golf, especially at the old Springfield golf course, where Makro and other outlets now occupy pride of place. 

He won many golf club tournaments, and I recall, with a bemused chuckle, his advice to me to put a ‘tika’ (dot) on a ball before striking it! I haven’t tried that yet.

Lest I forget, Ranjith was an entertainer, too, and on those long, winding roads he would belt out traditional Bihari folk songs, sung during important family occasions such as weddings.  

One of my treasured gifts is Kally’s The Struggle, 60 years in focus, a kaleidoscope of relevant pictures of the time. “To my dear friend Brij. Enjoy the Struggle of 60 years - Ranjith Kally. 09/12/09.”  

There’s so much more to add, suffice to say: Hamba kahle, RK, or in my disjointed Hindi way, Aap ki athma ko shanti mile. Rest in peace.

Kally, who was cremated at the Clare Estate Crematorium, leaves his children Jyoti, Pavitra (wife Leela died in 1982 and son Jayant 10 years ago), his grandchildren, family and friends. Leela, of course, was the late Harrypersadh’s sister. - Brijlall Ramguthee, former editor of Post.  
Click here to Follow the Sunday Tribune on Twitter
Or Click here if you prefer to like the Tribune on Facebook
SUNDAY TRIBUNE