Durban - An internal eThekwini municipal audit report has revealed a widespread abuse of metro police vehicles and irregular spending in procuring the fleet. The damning report, which The Mercury has seen, exposes how the metro police illegally extended and inflated an expired contract to hire 51 luxury cars they did not need. The report said the contract used to hire the vehicles had been illegally extended as it was about to expire. The original contract, for R1.4 million, was increased by more than R2.6m to a total of more than R4m. The probe by Audit and Risk Assurance Services made damning findings against the unit, alleging corruption and fraud. The metro police unit had hired the cars via city fleet after a priority meeting on June 13 between senior city officials and the premier to curb violent protests in the city.  The report found that city fleet ordered 51 vehicles for metro police without doing a proper needs analysis of vehicles available across council.  “No evidence was provided to support the performance of a needs analysis study. The council had available vehicles similar to those hired by city fleet for the purpose,” it said. It found that the needs analysis showed that the metro police needed 21 vehicles, six nyalas, one water canon, six Toyota minibuses and six double cab bakkies with lockable sliding bins and two Canters to load arrested suspects. Instead, among the cars eventually hired were Golf GTIs, Ford Rangers, Ford Everests, Fortuner SUVs and VW Amaroks. “Not one armoured vehicle was requested to fulfil the mandate as planned,” said the report. It also found that some of the vehicles were abused, with some having been used outside working hours while others were allocated to employees who had car allowances.  “The hired vehicles allegedly have been used by metro police for their own business and/or private use by members and some have been used to travel as far as Port Shepstone and Johannesburg outside council use,” it said. It also raised concerns that  metro deputy head Steve Middleton’s signature appeared on a document where the head, Eugene Nzama, should have signed. “The signature is direct cause of misrepresentation; the deputy head is not Eugene Nzama but Steve Middleton,” it said. Approached for comment, Middleton said he had not seen the report but it was his responsibility to deputise for Nzama. “I am his deputy. I sign on his behalf when he is not there.”  Attempts to reach Nzama were unsuccessful. Nzama recently took the city to court, complaining that his role as the head of the unit was being undermined.  Nzama said a specific example of how he had been “sidelined” was that last year more than 20 vehicles, including double cabs, single cabs, combis, BMW and Audi sedans were hired without his approval or knowledge. “The issue of these hired vehicles has created multiple problems for me and for the department at large, as I have been called upon by the majority of members under my unit, as well as the internal audit unit, to account for these  vehicles, for which I have no answers.  “These vehicles were handed over to my subordinate officers, who have distributed them in a manner which suits them, not according to the operational needs of the metro police department.” Ethekwini spokesperson Tozi Mthethwa said the municipality would not speak on the matter as the issues raised were under investigation.  DA leader Zwakele Mncwango said they were aware of the report and were concerned that it had not been tabled before the executive committee, saying this impeded the ability of the council to hold officials to account. Mncwango said: “I still believe there is more to be uncovered here. We need an independent investigation. We will look at this report and we want people criminally charged.” IFP leader Mdu Nkosi said he was aware that Nzama had complained in court about the cars. “There is a lot that is not going right with metro police. It is being dominated by politics rather than work,” said Nkosi.  The Mercury