DURBAN - A GUN battle in the middle of the night claimed the lives of nine people this week, among them a policeman and eight suspected ATM bombers.
Residents of the Mpumalanga township near Hammarsdale would have been asleep in their homes as the gun battle between police 
and criminals raged in the streets.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

By Monday morning, a night after the prolonged gun battle, relatives had to step over blood-drenched bodies, as they were loaded onto a mortuary van while forensic officers combed the scene.

The battle claimed the life of  National Intervention Unit member Warrant Officer Duncan Ndabezinhle Zwane, 44. 

The other eight killed were all suspects. Among them were Celimpilo Mbeje, age unknown, Thembinkosi Ndlovu, 37 and Thembelani Dlamini, 25. The rest have yet to be identified. 

Zwane was hailed as a hero by his colleagues,  who had come under fire with him when they spotted a gang of men, who were allegedly about to bomb an ATM.

Police spokesperson Captain Nqobile Gwala said the shoot-out ensued when the police intercepted them. 

The suspects fled to nearby bush where more gunshots were exchanged with the police, who killed three of them.

“The team continued the search for members of this armed gang and a second group were tracked to a homestead in the Mophela area.

“In another exchange of gunfire, a further five suspects were fatally wounded,” Gwala said. 

During the processing of the scenes, police recovered two rifles, four handguns, five explosive devices, two detonators, gas masks, goggles, gloves and two stolen cars. 

When the Sunday Tribune visited the first shooting scene where three suspects were killed, blood stains were still visible on the road. 

A 74-year-old pensioner, Gogo Ncwane, who lives near the shoot-out area, was in shock. 

“I feared a bullet would come through the bedroom window and hurt me. I heard the footsteps of people running in the yard. 

“I ducked under the bed until it was quiet. The next morning we picked up bullet shells in the yard. I have never seen something like this,” Ncwane said.

At the last shootout scene in Mophela, sleeping residents were awakened to more gunshots as police pounced on the suspects at a house, where five suspects were killed. 

The owner of the house, Joseph Khwela, 64, and his daughter, Mayo Khwela, were also busy cleaning the blood-stained walls and floors where two suspects died, while three others died in the yard. 

“I saw blood everywhere. Dead bodies had bullet wounds in the head and neck,” Khwela said. 

Khwela said the shooting had shaken the whole neighbourhood. They were gossiping that the house was used as a hideout by criminals.
 @NkululekoNene2
Click here to Follow the Sunday Tribune on Twitter
Or Click here if you prefer to like the Tribune on Facebook
SUNDAY TRIBUNE