Durban – Can social media drive governments to change, or can your hashtag prayer chain make a difference?
One female journalist, Maria Ressa of the Philippines, is showing just that, with online content geared to making a change.
She’s a pain in the side of the Filipino government, admitted Ressa, who created online news site Rappler in 2012 specialising in conflict reporting, which has made its mark on the media landscape in the country.
She was the guest speaker at the Women in News summit on Wednesday, held during the World Association of Newspapers and News Publishers (Wan-Ifra) congress in Durban, and said journalism called for fearless coverage of stories.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
“Be fearless. But know your limits. I had some of my journalists kidnapped in 2012 and those were the worst ten days of my life, but it worked out. One of the reasons was that as a media company we did not just follow the pack of other media; we thought out of the box. By doing things differently and using online media, this is how media will thrive and how stories will be told, especially if there are restrictions on media,” said Ressa.
The Philippines is presently under martial law, declared by president Rodrigo Duterte, over the southern island Mindanao and adjacent Sulu Sea over terrorism claims.
Ressa shared her tips with female journalists, urging them to always learn new ways of doing things, to embrace fear, to always assess the risks and to exercise control.
“These tips you can use when you are out in the field reporting news, and when you are in business. We have to be fearless in what we do, and hold people accountable. I receive threats, but we continue working,” she said.
Rappler specialises not just in reporting, but in content marketing, social media engagement, access to crowdsourcing and data.
One of the tools they created was a “mood navigator” in which the mood and feelings of the Filipino nation could be measured.
“We have a mood meter for every story and you can track how an event ripples through society. We are feeding off the energy of emotions on social media. Social networks are your families and friends and online they are on steroids because there are no boundaries of space and time. Information flies in the social networks and this impacts on behaviour,” she said.
She said there were small pockets of people, who in the online world were driving the conversation.
She said that because the content generated on Rappler was fearless, it made her and her company a “special favourite” target of president Rodrigo Deterte.
“More than 60% of his online posts are about Rappler for doing a story he deems is against the government,” she said.
Citizens should not be complacent when issues of corruption arise.
“Most people are apathetic, or just mere observers. But there will always be a small group of people who will take action. This is the ripple effect we see in society and how fast information can spread. In my country I want to help build communities that act when issues arise, and that’s the power of online media, so yes the prayer chains can work if it gets people to act,” she said.
With online technology, however, comes issues of fake news, and this is what journalists now have to battle.
“Previously journalists working at newspapers were the gatekeepers of information, now anybody can use social media, and
therein lies the danger, no one is checking what goes out there,” she said.

Independent Media