South Africa’s precious water source areas need to be protected, restored and valued for the good of the country as a whole – and not thrown open to questionable mining ventures.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
This was the key message at the launch of WWF South Africa’s third Journey of Water which kicked off with a 16km hike in the Mabola Protected Environment near Wakkerstroom on World Environment Day. 
The Journey of Water is a biennial event which brings together a group of influential South Africans who traverse a water catchment area as a way of opening their eyes to the many challenges facing water security in this country. 
In the process, they are encouraged to share their experiences and insights with their own audiences.
This year’s celebrity group includes Morning Live anchor Leanne Manas, Isidingo star Hlubi Mboya, HipHop artist Reason, extreme swimmer Ryan Stramrood and YFM DJ Da Kruk.
The Mabola Protected Environment lies within the Ekangala/Drakensberg strategic water source area, a high-yielding catchment that feeds the Tugela, Pongola and Vaal rivers.
The Mabola Protected Environment, however, is under threat from a proposed coalmine venture.
“Mining in the area has potentially serious consequences for the sustainability of the livestock farming enterprises, water resources and sensitive wetlands, as well as eco-tourism activities and nature conservation land use,” said the organisation in a statement. 



Research shows that 8% of South Africa’s surface area generates 50% of the water in our rivers yet most of these areas enjoy little or no protection, and even where protection has been granted, threats such as the one posed to Mabola are increasing.
WWF-SA chief executive Dr Morné du Plessis said: “The natural environment plays a critical role in providing water for our people and our economy. Allowing a mine in an area such as the Mabola Protected Environment not only threatens our country’s water security but also puts other protected areas in South Africa at risk.”
The group will traverse an area from Mpumalanga to northern KwaZulu-Natal over a three-day period from June 5 to 7, hiking, paddling and boating through some of South Africa’s most majestic landscapes while engaging with local communities and seeing first-hand the challenges facing water on its journey from source to tap.
The Mercury