KwaZulu-Natal religious bodies have welcomed the recommendation to change legislation so that they can regulate themselves. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
The Commission for the Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Cultural, Religious and Linguistic Communities (CRL Rights Commission) – which presented its report, “Commercialisation of Religion and Abuse of People’s Belief Systems”, to a number of portfolio committees on Tuesday – began its investigation as a way to protect religious freedoms while guarding against unscrupulous pastors and religious leaders.
“This proposed amendment to the CRL Act will ensure that freedom of religion is not only protected but it is also guaranteed in the country, and the religious sector is given the space and capacity to resolve its challenges and make all the relevant recommendations to the commission,” said commission chairperson Thoko Mkhwanazi-Xaluva in the report.
The report also recommended a process that would establish a mechanism for the registration of religious leaders’ places of worship. “This… would be similar to that of other professional bodies such as that of lawyers, nurses, doctors and engineers.”
The report said the proposed structure would safeguard that the mechanism which was put in place was one where decisions were made by each religion on behalf of its affiliated members.
The commission’s report began as a way to counter “controversial practices” where – as was reported in the news recently – congregants were asked to eat grass, snakes, drink petrol or part with considerable sums of money to be guaranteed a blessing or miracle.
Zulu cultural expert Dr VVO Mkhize, the founder of the Umsamo Institute, told The Mercury that the establishment of the structures would be good for worshippers.
“If someone has a doctorate, for example, you should be able to find out where that person studied, what their area of expertise is… You should be able to do the same with your pastor, or any other religious leader.”
He said the only problem he predicted was that government bodies were good at instituting probes, but not good at implementing their findings.
“This needs to be more than just talk.”
Ashwin Trikamjee, the president of the Hindu Maha Sabha, said the structures could help prevent “unscrupulous practices”.
“There needs to be a code of ethics and discipline so we can prevent people from being exploited. As it stands, religious bodies are answerable to nobody. 
“That is not acceptable.”
The African Christian Democratic Party said the CRL findings and recommendations were the result of a process handled diligently and with the seriousness needed to approach such contentious yet critical concerns.  
“What is needed now is for Members of Parliament to embark on a process of hearing the people of South Africa on these issues, especially the faith community and constitutional experts – and then for MPs to weigh the facts and decide how Parliament should respond,” the party said.
The South African Muslim Network (SAMNET) chairman Dr Faisal Suliman said it was important that all religious institutions abide by South African law with regards to financial regulations, administration of bank accounts and compliance with tax and banking practices and ensure that there was no contravention of the Reserve Bank and foreign exchange regulations.
"In this case, the work of the CRL (is) to mediate and carry out educational campaigns (which) is important to ensure that there is no contravention of our laws. Similarly, (it) has a role in perhaps providing education and enabling an environment of mutual co-operation and interfaith understanding, tolerance and respect."
The Mercury