eNCA recently announced the appointment of their new new Managing Director( MD) and Editor-in-Chief, Mapi Mhlangu who is taking over from Anton Harber. Mhlangu joined the channel in 2009 and has held various positions in the eMedia Investments organisation with her most recent position as eNCA’s News Director. In that position she was responsible for both editorial and technical operations.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
 
New Managing Director and Editor-in-Chief, Mapi Mhlangu, said: “I’m honoured to be entrusted with the responsibility of leading this news organisation and its talented employees at this critical time in South Africa and its newsrooms. There is a pressing need for news media to ensure that citizens are adequately informed, so as to engage the state and to ensure that the benefits of freedom are realised. South African viewers have consistently indicated that eNCA is their trusted source for independent news and analysis which is accurate and unbiased. I look forward to navigating through the challenges ahead with our dynamic team.”
 
In a statement eNCA thanked Anton Harber for his contribution to both the channel and the newsroom where he was a mentor and nurturer for news leaders within the organization.
 
Mhlangu’s predecessor, Anton Harber, said: “I hand over the reins with eNCA’s audience and advertising revenue strong and growing, and I think this provides a solid foundation for Mapi and the excellent newsroom team to build on. eNCA is a crucial South African institution, one of the cornerstones of independent journalism, and its role is going to be more important than ever in coming months.”
 
eMedia Investments Chief Operating Officer Mark Rosin said that the institution in 2015 spoke about the ongoing transformation of eNCA and it’s newsroom and that Mhlangu’s appointment is testimony to that intention.
 
“With 20 years of news media experience and almost a decade at eNCA, we have full confidence that eNCA will continue to thrive under Mapi’s editorial leadership,” Rosin said.
 
eNCA indicated they will continue to provide journalism that is fair and free of favor. “I am confident that Mapi is well placed to build on this,” Harber added.

BUSINESS REPORT ONLINE