Seven KwaZulu-Natal athletes all of whom have received organ transplants will be representing South Africa in the World Transplant Games which began this week. The SA Transplant Sports Association said that 52 transplant athletes, including five juniors, and many more supporters, would descend on Malaga, Spain.&nbsp; Twenty of the team members are new and all have been selected following their success at this year s National Transplant Games in Johannesburg. They have all survived either a heart, lung, kidney, liver or bone marrow transplant. The World Transplant Games, they said, took place every two years, and were supported by the International Olympic Committee.&nbsp; It represents the largest organ donor awareness event in the world, featuring a week of 17 sporting events. Team South Africa will join over 2 000 other transplant athletes from 56 countries. For Chatsworth resident Anil Balmakund, 48, the games were an opportunity to create awareness of the importance of organ transplants. There are people in dire need of organs all over the world. This can change lives, said the squash player.Before receiving a kidney in 1998, he had been on dialysis for five years. The transplant changed my life. Before I hadn t been active at all, but now keeping fit is a priority. This year s event will be his fifth games.Marc Nortje, 37, of Newlands East, representing the country in the high- and long-jump events, said he had fallen ill while working on a mine in Johannesburg.He also had to undergo dialysis while awaiting a kidney. I ve always been active. I used to play soccer, where I even got my national colours. I thought the transplant would change my lifestyle, but I was told that that did not have to be the case. He will be representing the country for the first time. I think people need to know that this can happen to anyone. The road to recovery is difficult and depressing, but you can do it. Team manager Hermann Steyn said: Selection was just the beginning. It is an enormous commitment of time and money. The last five months have been busy for the athletes, keeping fit, regularly training in their sport, attending a training camp, doing publicity and trying to raise the R30 000 per person to get there.&nbsp; However, the opportunity to represent their country, celebrate life and in doing so, paying tribute to their donors, is the goal. The last three games were held in Mar Del Plata, Argentina (2015), Durban (2013) and Gotenburg, Sweden (2011).The Mercury