PaperMoney an initiative to help beggars by empowering them with jobs as newspaper sellers began this week and is slowly gaining momentum. Project co-ordinator Stuart Talbot, of the Denis Hurley Centre, told The Mercury that while sales were slow on Monday, the pace picked up a day later. Some of the guys are very positive, while others are still a little apprehensive. Others are quite excited. Talbot said motorists at the intersections had been receptive to the sellers. I hope to see even more improvement in the coming days and weeks. One of the sellers, 24-year-old Thabani Chauca, who usually begged at the intersection of Smiso Nkwanyana (Goble) Road and Masabalala Yengwa (NMR) Avenue, said things were going well but could be better. There are still some people begging at the intersection where we re selling the papers, so people driving past give them money and don t want to buy the papers. They say they have no money after that. But Chauca said he remained hopeful. This is good for me. It s good for all of us. It s a chance to have a better life, he said. Raymond Perrier, director of the Denis Hurley Centre, said they had been blown away by the incredible support for the campaign, both online and on the streets. It s been positive. It s one of those campaigns that is so obvious, if you think about it. It just works, for all involved. The other partner Urban Lime Properties' chief executive Jonny Friedman said: &quot;Our hope is that South Africa will lead the way with this fairly simple framework and that Paper Money will be adopted in other cities around the world. We want more global idea-sharing about how to tackle social problems in urban areas which are forecast to explode in population numbers over the next decade. This same problem begging at the traffic lights is prevalent in almost EVERY major city in the world this isn t just a Durban or South African phenomenon.&quot; He said his wife Katie (also marketing director of the company) had been &quot;bugging&quot; Perrier for many months to &quot;knock our heads together&quot; to find a robust solution to the begging at the robots in Durban. &quot;So far early signs are very encouraging and both motorists, vendors and the public are extremely positive. There are so many humbling and surprising stories coming from our very brave and stoic vendors who are, in the main, just regular people looking to get by in life and support their families one way or another. We recognise there will be challenges along the way, but we are ready for them.&quot; Mercury editor Yogas Nair said: The response to the initiative has been overwhelming. Motorists have reached out in their numbers and opened their hearts and wallets to support this worthy cause. This has been great motivation to our up-and-coming entrepreneurs. Thank you for sharing our vision of helping create a better life for the less fortunate. The Mercury