Youngsters are often encouraged to aim high when considering a career. Sadly, many will feel their options are limited and may believe they have no option but to settle for less than the job they dream of.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Fortunately, there are options available: opportunities that can provide a springboard to something truly challenging and fulfilling. One example is Boeing’s [NYSE: BA] highly acclaimed six months International Business Internship Program (IBIP), which is now open to South African students in a business-related field.
Full-time under-graduate and post-graduate students from South African universities and technical universities are encouraged to apply for the internship. Two students from Wits University are currently on the full-time program (Jan – July 2017). Registration for the next intake period (Jan –July 2018) is open from June the 6th to July the 15th 2017.
Laila Zayan, Head of Talent Pipeline Development at Boeing, says the IBIP is open to all students studying in a business-related field including Industrial Engineering, Accounting, Finance, Human Resources, Marketing, Strategy, Management, and Information Systems.
She says applicants must be enrolled in an undergraduate or graduate program or have graduated within the last 12 months (applicants that graduated in May 2016 or earlier will NOT be considered).  Students must have excellent communications and interpersonal skills, be high achievers academically, demonstrate leadership and team work skills.
J. Miguel Santos, Boeing Managing Director - Sub-Sahara Africa and Director of Commercial Airplane Sales for Africa based in Johannesburg, encouraged students to apply, saying it is a great bridge to the world of working. He cites is as a is a once in a lifetime opportunity to get real world exposure to a large multi-national corporation.
“The students will be provided with US-based work experience and will prove extremely valuable when they return and invest their new skills to the benefit of South Africa. Having Boeing on your resume could be a launching pad for your future career.”

The International Business Internship Program (IBIP), which was launched in 2012, provides students valuable exposure to the latest technological and business advances and thinking in a variety of disciplines relating to business operations, finance, marketing, strategy and the aviation industry.  
The students will be exposed to a range of business activities and work alongside Boeing employees in various fields. They will also have an opportunity to spend time with Boeing leaders, visit several Boeing factories and share their experience with other IBIP interns from around the world.
Zayan says interested students can apply through the career advice divisions of their respective universities who will be provided with information brochures.

BUSINESS REPORT ONLINE