Durban – Women have made progress in the media industry, but the stereotypical gender challenges they faced decades ago remained entrenched in the 21st century. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

This was the common theme from women leaders at the Women in News Summit held as part of the WAN-IFRA World News Media Congress at the Durban ICC on Wednesday.

The congress, which invests in addressing the gender gap in newsrooms, highlighted how women still battled to climb the corporate ladder; have to choose between the career and family; have their voices suppressed; earn respect; sexism, have their abilities questioned and how they have to work twice as hard to be recognised.

Speakers from all over the world shared heart-warming accounts of their experiences from how they had bullied their way into the system to create and grab opportunities for themselves to using softer skills such as wearing heels so they could look all the people they talked to in the eye to assert themselves.

Others told of how they politely declined acting in managerial positions but instead declared that they would take them up only when the positions were offered to them permanently, while others have had to learn from mistakes to become better newsroom leaders.

Pamella Sittoni, the managing editor of the East African in Kenya and this year’s recipient of the Women in News Editorial Leadership Sub-Saharan Africa Award, said the environment in media organisations was still not conducive for women who wanted to progress in their careers while also having families.

“Mothers opt out because working conditions don’t allow them to do both,” she said.

 “Organisations need to take note of women’s needs and it is usually for a short time, then it is over. When I was interviewed as a 22 year old, one of the panelists asked if I intended to have a family, a question I don’t think they would ask a man. I told him that I would eventually and I did,” said Sittoni.

She said the biggest challenge was to create a critical mass of women editors because women were needed at the top to fight battles for other women on a platform where decisions were taken.

All the women who spoke are leaders in their own right and they are achieving great things in their respective countries, but their collective journey has been anything but easy. 

For some, the heartache and challenges are in the past, but for others the struggle is still real.

The dynamic legendary Maria Ressa, CEO and executive editor of Rappler, an online news site, still has to deal with daily attacks from those who are opposed to the work that she and her team do, particularly the government leaders in her country, the Phillipines.

Ressa, who, though old school but embraces technology, has been attacked via the very same technology she believes in from hashtags calling for her arrest to messages encouraging people to rape her to death.

“The dangers we face are as exponential as the positives. Facebook has been weaponised; we are more prone to be attacked for what we say and they don’t just attack you, they go after the essence of your soul and it is sexist,” she said.

While the personal attacks are a challenge, Ressa maintains that the biggest threat for women in media is finding ways to evolve with the demands of how news has to be told in the digital era.

“The old business of news is crumbling,” she said.

Ressa shared a lot of business lessons she has learnt along the way from her days as a war correspondent, newsroom manager and now owner. 

She summed up her lessons in five key points: make the choice to learn; embrace your fear; beware of the pack; assess the danger and have access within control. 

Other speakers emphasised the importance of asserting yourself and one another, asking for help, not taking on more than you can handle, mentorship, embracing change, not fearing to make mistakes, being sensitive to women’s needs, bringing other women up and to stopping being hard on themselves.

There is no doubt that women now have a voice in newsrooms and there is some recognition that their input is as critical as their male colleagues if media organisations are to tell diverse stories to their audiences, but testimonies from the summit also show that it is still not loud enough and there are forces still determined to suppress it.

Those who have broken the glass ceiling will have to continue soldiering on and pay it forward by empowering as many deserving women as they possible can in their respective newsrooms.

Mahlatse Gallens, the chairperson of the South African National Editor’s Forum, summed it up perfectly by referring to the famous quote: “To strong women, may we know them, be them and raise them.”

Independent Media