After its recent sell out run and almost a decade leaving audiences in stitches, Charous and Bruinous is back and Alyssia Birjalal chatted to the show’s most recent addition. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

She’s become an overnight sensation with her hilarious encounters of Indian aimed jokes She’s also never considered herself to be a comedian, until December last year when she created “Have A Bash With Tash” and it went viral. Now she’s sharing the stage with some of the country’s most successful comedians. 

We caught up with Tash to find out more about her success in comedy and what audience can expect from her this weekend. 

Where did the funny streak come from? 
I will have to say it's been with me for many moons. I’ve always been the funny bunny in the family but never a comedian. 

Did you ever think you would make a career out of comedy? 
I have always enjoyed comedy as my preferred choice however my one literally came out of the woodwork recently and has hit like wild fire.

What’s your take on Indian focused comedy and comedy in the country? 
Indian comedy has come along way and we are certainly up there with the cream of the crop. As for South Africa on the whole I feel as though comedy has a massive influence on society.  We live in a world filled with stressful lifestyles and comedy is certainly a stress relief. It also paves the way for real talk. 
While people may laugh and enjoy the comedy shows there is a lot of truth in comedy. On my personal capacity I want my comedy to influence society because the message behind my comedy is to change the norms of society as well as motivational intervention through comedy. 

Who do you look up to in the industry? 
My role models are definitely Leandra Reddy, Trevor Noah, Neil Green, Masood Boomguard and Mervin Pillay. 

You have the ability to really bring people to their knees with laughter, how does it feel? 
The feeling is truly humbling. This is my passion to see people happy. The ability to do this through a forum of laughter is something money can't buy. It makes me so happy. 

You are sharing a stage with great comedian like Neville Pillay, Annalakshmi, Neil Green and Robby Collins how does it feel? 
I am super excited. They are truly amazing and I feel honored.  

What can we look forward to in your segment of the show? 
My segments are always unscripted and not planned so all I can say is this big girl is bringing laughter in a big way!!!

Why should we come out to watch the show? 
The show has an amazing line up. A night filled with laughter. And of course it's the perfect way to unwind and just live a little.
WIN WIN WIN!!!!To win one of five sets of double tickets to the comedy festival SMS ComFest and your name to 33258 before 9am tomorrow (Friday). SMSes charged at R1.50 and winners will be contacted telephonically.Winning tickets are for Sunday, September 3. * The Charous and Bruinous Comedy Festival takes place on September 1 to 3 at Sibaya iZulu Theatre. Tickets are R150 and are available from Computicket and Checkers, or call 0846641015.