While director of the University of KwaZulu-Natal’s Centre for Civil Society (CCS) Dr Shauna Mottiar is passionate about civil society, social movements and community engagement, she had never really planned on becoming an academic.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
As a Masters and later PhD Candidate at Wits University, she was mentored and supervised by Professor Tom Lodge, who was the head of department of Political Studies at the time. 
This cemented her interest in democracy and the deepening and consolidation of democracy beyond democratic transition.
“My first job, research fellow at the Electoral Institute of Southern Africa allowed me to work on various studies of elections in the region with a focus on democratic institutions. 
In my next job, research fellow at the Centre for Policy Studies, I was able to build on this with a focus on the substantive aspects of democracy including access to social rights and services.”
She later worked with a number of organisations and “think tanks” such as the Centre for Conflict Resolution and the African Centre for the Constructive Resolution of Disputes focusing on issues related to democratisation in Africa and South Africa particularly.
Mottiar has also worked with some of the most dynamic female activists in the country and notes that women in the most marginalised spaces are able to turn their "disempowerment" around to effect social change in their communities through moral fortitude, perseverance and public spiritedness.
Mottiar joined the CCS in 2008, following a project on social movements, and began to work on democratic participation and social protest in South Africa. 
It was here that she was first introduced to academic life and discovered the vast opportunities for debate, analysis and approaching the world and social problems in a different way – a way that could potentially make a difference.
“I realised that post-graduate teaching spaces are potential sites for transformation. Often students come to me and say that the class had changed their perspectives on things or that they were inspired by the case studies that had been reviewed.”
Her main areas of research are civil society, social movements and social protest. 
“I am interested in the ways in which people participate and engage as democratic citizens – also the remarkable potential social movements have to effect social transformation. 
I am also interested in the role of philanthropy and social entrepreneurship in development and their potential to engage with the systemic rather than symptomatic aspects of social injustice.”
Mottiar believes that much of her research on social protest contributes to understandings of how South Africans most affected by inequality view the idea of participatory democracy.
“The fact that social protest is woven into the fabric of South African society in a positive way – as opposed to the negative way it is sometimes portrayed in the media. Through the Community Scholarship Initiative, I think CCS contributes to communities by promoting and supporting activism and activist networks as an important vehicle for social transformation in South Africa.”
The Mercury