The void in South Africa's literary landscape left by the lack of isiZulu published books authored by women, spurred language researcher Dr Gugulethu Mazibuko into action.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Mazibuko, based at the University of KwaZulu-Natal's College of Humanities, is passionate about community engagement and development, often going beyond her call of duty to make a difference in the lives of many, particularly women.

In her hometown, KwaMpukunyoni in Mtubatuba, she started a project to aid women to instill a love of education in their children.

She achieves this through giving sound advice to those who need it most.

Mazibuko, who now lives in New Germany in Pinetown, often acts as a pillar of strength to a number of women through a New Germany Ladies club she formed with her neighbours, that provides for the needy and educates women about different issues that affect their lives.

Through her interactions with these women, she has written short stories in the anthology written by women only titled Wathint’ Imbokodo.  

She educates women and the youth in the eThekwini Reading and Writing Club on writing various literary genres.

Her active citizenry has led to various organisations inviting her to speak to women about the importance of language and culture.

“As a language activist, I educate women on the importance of mother tongue instruction and language rights. I also bring awareness on the language policy,” she said. 

Since 2010, Mazibuko has been conducting genealogy research for African Families as commissioned by the KZN Office of the Premier.

Her work in bridging the gap between lost family ties has contributed towards many families writing their personal histories and preserving their living heritage.

A lover of language, heritage and culture, Mazibuko’s venture into academia was an unprecedented one.

Through working as a principal language practitioner at the Department of Arts and Culture, was where her passion for language was set ablaze.

This love for language grew when she registered to do her PhD in isiZulu at the former University of Durban Westville.

During this time, she pursued her lifelong dream of teaching and research where she eventually applied for a lecturer position.

“I never looked back.”

The completion of her PhD was a fulfilling pursuit, one that propelled her into academia as an isiZulu researcher.

Another feather in her cap is that she advises the National Department of Arts and Culture on literature and culture.

Within the framework of her craft, Mazibuko teaches, among other things, lexicography, literature, heritage and culture while also publishing literary works of her own. 
She contributed chapters in academic books as well.

In 2016, the National Library of South Africa in Cape Town honoured her for being a “phenomenal woman in developing and promoting isiZulu in the country”.

The Mercury