DURBAN - THE global hype around the much-anticipated fight between Ultimate Fighting Champion (UFC) title-holder and UFC golden boy, Conor McGregor, versus undefeated boxing icon Floyd Mayweather hit Durban this week. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
And it’s set to reach peak fever today, just before the two men step into the ring in Las Vegas in the early hours of tomorrow morning, with Durban betting agencies saying Mayweather is the overwhelming favourite, while other Durbanites are putting their money on McGregor. 
Venues which will be staying open for what is expected to be a historic bruising battle have sold out – but there may be standing room. S43 Brewery in Umgeni Road has been booked out by Durban’s boxing and MMA fraternity, while Connor’s Pub in Durban North is also expecting a full house in the early hours. 
On Friday, local MMA instructor Darryl Faught said: “Everybody is talking about this fight. 
“McGregor is going in as the underdog, but they will be boxing with smaller gloves and he hits like a sledgehammer. McGregor is also very, very fit. On the other hand, Mayweather has years of boxing behind him and that experience may just count.”
Taking no sides, Faught said he was putting his money on a draw. “I am all for where the money is and I can make the most on a draw.”
Former boxing champ Dingaan Thobela agreed the change to smaller gloves could work in McGregor’s favour.
“If you look at McGregor’s history, he’s done well for himself. It may be the first time he fights as a boxer, but if you look at most of his fights he uses his fists often, so it won’t be a completely new field for him.
“But if I had to put my money on someone winning, it will have to be Mayweather because the fight will be fought on boxing terms,” said Thobela. 
On Wednesday the two fighters declared a truce after weeks of vicious verbal attacks, offering praise instead of profanities at the final media conference ahead of their clash. 
Since the fight between undefeated boxer Mayweather and mixed martial arts champion McGregor was announced in June, the two men have taken part in a profanity-laced world tour to hype a bout that has been met with both scepticism and excitement. 
The restrained tone of Wednesday’s media conference underscored the high stakes of what is expected to be the richest fight in boxing, with McGregor in line for a $100 million (R1.3 billion) payday and Mayweather as much as $200m. 
While boxing purists and pundits have denounced the fight as nothing more than a laughable cash grab, it has nonetheless captured the fascination of fans. 
Showtime executive Stephen Espinoza said the fight, which will be shown in more than 200 countries, is on pace to smash pay per view records. 
Local boxing trainer Damien Durandt said there were a lot of questions around Mayweather and why he had taken on the fight. 
“Is it possible that Mayweather can’t handle any of the younger professional boxers any more? No one has asked this question. I think Mayweather will win on points if there is a stoppage towards the end of the second half of the fight. For the first two rounds, Mayweather will get a feel of McGregor’s movement and a taste of his punching power on his shoulders and hands – and then he (Mayweather) will go to work,” said Durandt. 
The bout is expected to become the highest grossing event in the history of either sport, with Mayweather the more than firm favourite to win at bookmakers across the globe. 
Mayweather boasts a flawless professional record of 49-0, while McGregor has never been in a boxing match.
In the highly aggressive press conferences between the two men ahead of the fight, McGregor has said he will take down Mayweather within four rounds. 
Local Extreme Fighting Champion (EFC) welter and middleweight champion, Dricus du Plessis, said McGregor has a chance. 
“I’m putting my money on McGregor, for sure. I think he’ll take it by TKO in the first five rounds. If it goes the distance, I think Mayweather will take it. I think McGregor’s biggest weapon in this fight will be his size/reach advantage and, most of all, his footwork. It will be too fast and unlike anything Mayweather has seen before,” said Du Plessis.
Coming in as the underdog, McGregor has Durban behind him when it comes to taking a bet. 
Commenting on betting trends, Track & Ball’s Stephen Marshall said: “With these type of fights, it attracts the occasional gambler, the same person who bets on the July. 
“There has been a massive amount of hype and it does create quite a bit of interest. 
“Mayweather is the short-priced favourite at 2/10, he’s in his own ring, but the value is with McGregor.”
Hollywood Bets’ Dermot O’Connell said the interest in this fight has outstripped that of the Mayweather/Manny Pacquiao boxing match in 2015. 
“It’s a high-profile event  We have taken more on McGregor and we expect betting to increase today. It will be interesting as the betting will continue as the fight is going on and the odds will change.”
Follow the IOS on Twitter
Follow the IOS on Facebook

 INDEPENDENT ON SATURDAY