Weather forecasters have predicted significant snowfalls and heavy rains for KwaZulu-Natal this week.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
The South African Weather Service said on Monday that South Africans could expect a cold snap to affect most the country during the latter part of this week, specifically from Wednesday onwards. 
“Particularly cold daytime temperatures are expected to dominate the south-western parts on Wednesday, spreading to include the central and eastern parts on Thursday. Some places in the high-lying central and eastern interior are likely to experience daytime temperatures of the order of only five to 10 degrees Celsius for up to three consecutive days.”
They said “significant snowfalls” could also be expected over the southern and central Drakensberg. 
“Snowfall could be heavy over the north-eastern parts of the Eastern Cape, possibly leading to the closure of the majority of mountain passes in the region as well as associated disruption of traffic flow.”
They said rain and showers were expected over the south-western parts of the country on Tuesday and Wednesday. 
“By Thursday, rainfall is expected to move eastwards, with the Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-Natal particularly well-favoured to receive widespread rainfall. 
These provinces may even experience heavy rainfall as well as localised flooding, especially along the coast and adjacent interior regions.”
Along much of the southern coastline, periods of strong, gusty winds combined with moderate seas were also expected. 
“There is, however, a strong likelihood that gale force winds of a damaging nature as well as rough to very rough sea conditions may develop along the Wild Coast and KwaZulu-Natal on Thursday.”
These extreme weather conditions were due to the development of an intense trough (an extension of a low pressure) in the upper portions of the atmosphere, which was expected to move over the country on Wednesday, they said. 
“Thereafter, the trough is likely to intensify further, becoming a so-called cut-off low pressure system on Thursday. 
By Friday, this weather system is expected to exit the country, when rainfall will be restricted to the eastern extremities of the country, heralding a return to dry, settled weather this weekend.”
The Mercury