The ANC Youth League in KwaZulu-Natal says it is not having sleepless nights over the motion of no-confidence in President Jacob Zuma as it will not succeed.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
League provincial secretary Thanduxolo Sabelo also said he was confident Speaker Baleka Mbete would not allow a secret ballot.
Mbete is due to make an announcement on Monday about whether the motion of no-confidence in Zuma, to be debated in Parliament on Tuesday, will be decided by open or secret ballot. 
“It is not going to be a secret ballot," Sabelo said. 
“The Speaker is very clear, she is very sober and there is no way she would allow a secret ballot. All other motions of no-confidence have been through open voting; why would she want to change the decorum of Parliament?” 
Sabelo said that even if the vote was held by secret ballot, Zuma would remain president. 
“The ANC has a majority in the National Assembly and this thing will be defeated. The opposition parties have tried seven times before and failed. 
"After Tuesday, the president will continue to work and serve the people to ensure we usher in an era of radical economic transformation”.
Suicidal
Sabelo said it would be “suicidal” for any ANC MP to defy the party. “If they do that they are gone. They will be processed and expelled. You do not defy your own party.”
A series of events are planned in the province either for or against the motion of no-confidence. 
Amakhosi and religious leaders under the banner of the National Interfaith Council of South Africa (Nicsa) will hold a prayer meeting at the Durban City Hall on Tuesday in support of Zuma.
Bishop Bheki Ngcobo of Nicsa said the motion of no-confidence was nothing but a ploy to remove a democratically-elected president from office. “If we allow this to happen then we will be in a bigger mess,” he said. 
Ngcobo said opposition parties were targeting Zuma because he championed radical economic transformation.
The ANC’s KwaDukuza region announced that it would stage a “massive” march in KwaDukuza (Stanger) on Tuesday against the motion.
The Active Citizens Movement will from 5pm today hold a two-hour interfaith event in support of the motion of no-confidence. The event, at Kendra Hall, will be attended by various religious leaders including Bishop Rubin Phillip of the Anglican Church.
ACM spokesperson Ben Madokwe said: “This is a civic society initiative. We are not going to have any political speeches. We will be praying against state capture.”
Madokwe said placard demonstrations were also planned for Tuesday at sites such as malls in Durban. 
DA KZN leader Zwakele Mncwango will address a party gathering at the Crusaders Sports Club on Tuesday in support of the motion.
The Mercury