He may not know how to cook, but founder of Wimpy Restaurants Group in the Southern Hemisphere Eric Tocknell certainly knows how to count beans and make money.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
The well-known businessman is the guest speaker at the Durban Chamber of Commerce and Industry’s (DCCI) 161st Annual Gala Dinner, which takes place on September 7.
He will share parts of his journey to success with those gathered.
Tocknell said: “I’m an accountant. I don’t know how to cook, how to freeze, how to do anything in the kitchen… but I do know how to make money so this was a golden opportunity. I took it and it worked.”
The group also includes the Golden Egg, Whistle Shop, Juicy Lucy and Milky Lane.
Tocknell said the restaurant concept was centred around families. 
“Children from those days have now grown up and they still acknowledge with thanks the outings they enjoyed. This was a real treat. Parents used to use the trip to one of the restaurants as a bargaining chip and say to them, if you do this, or this or that, we can go to the Wimpy,” he said.
Tocknell said it was a privilege and an honour to be part of the celebration and the chamber was doing outstanding work. 
“There’s great excitement, great anticipation and I’m looking forward to it,” he said.
What the country needed at the moment was motivation and he believed that anybody who had a platform should speak with encouragement and of opportunity, he said.
“What we’re missing is this thing of being able to ‘think big’. It’s all about going beyond your self-imposed limitations,” Tocknell said.
The chamber described Tocknell in a statement as a “visionary leader” of many talents who continued to make a vast contribution to the development of the country. He is the chairperson and director of several companies and a trustee of Shalom Trust Ministries with Angus Buchan. 
DCCI president elect Musa Makhunga, who will be inaugurated on the night of the dinner said Tocknell had been chosen because he was a role model for business owners.
“He’s an example of how you can take an idea, nurture it and turn it into reality. He has taken the Wimpy franchise to our African neighbours and to New Zealand and Australia,” Makhunga said.
“He shows that it is possible and, with hard work, any dream can come true.”
The businessman had also been chosen for maintaining his humility, despite his great success.
Makhunga said that most people viewed business as being focused on making money, but the chamber wanted to change those perceptions.
“We want to work with the government and make sure that what the businesses do also benefits society.”
DCCI chief executive Dumile Cele said a code of ethics, aimed at raising standards of business operations, would also be launched at the dinner.
The Mercury