DURBAN - “Death has robbed us of our loved ones; like a true criminal it stole those we love dearly.” ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
KwaZulu-Natal Transport MEC Mxolisi Kaunda said this during a mass funeral service for 20 people who died in a crash in KwaXimba near Cato Ridge last Sunday. 
Kaunda told more than 10 000 mourners: “It is not normal to lose 20 people at once.”
He said he could not blame God for human error after it was discovered the overloaded minibus taxi had no brakes. The 18-seater had been ferrying 26.
Kaunda lambasted both the minibus taxi owner and the driver.
“We were not happy when Fields Hill claimed 24 lives, but the owner was fined only R20 000 while the driver was sentenced to eight years’ (imprisonment),” he said.
The driver in that crash was Swazi national Sanele May. His boss, Gregory Govender, the owner of Sagekal Logistics, was fined for an unroadworthy truck and received a suspended sentence of 30 months’ imprisonment.
Also read: Fields Hill death truck owner gets fine, no jail time
“We want owners to also face harsh penalties. How can we allow 26 passengers to be ferried in a vehicle with worn-out brakes? We will reinforce our safety campaigns, setting up roadblocks across the province,” Kaunda said. 
He said killing more than one person was simply “murderous” and he wanted the culpable homicide charge changed.
Transport Minister Joe Maswanganyi has also warned road users not to use cellphones while driving. “Speeding, cellphone usage and alcohol are responsible for most of the accidents that affect youngsters,” he said. 
20 people were killed when the overloaded taxi in which they were travelling overturned
in KwaXimba near Cato Ridge. Picture: Doctor Ngcobo/ANA PicturesMaswanganyi said they were preparing a new regulation for Parliament to consider.
“We won’t allow operators on our roads who use unroadworthy taxis or buses. We are going to suspend a driver’s licence for two years if he’s caught speeding. For the unroadworthy fine, police will remove the disc and throw the driver in jail. The vehicle will be released after a certificate of roadworthiness is produced.”
At the service were ANC presidential candidate Dr Nkosazana Dlamini  Zuma, ANC treasurer Dr Zweli Mkhize, eThekwini mayor Zandile Gumede, MEC for social development Weziwe Thusi and former MEC for agriculture Meshack Hadebe. 
Follow the Sunday Tribune on Facebook
Follow the Sunday Tribune on Twitter 

SUNDAY TRIBUNE