IFP president Mangosuthu Buthelezi told hundreds of party supporters that the nationwide marches planned ahead of the no confidence vote were as symbolic as the 1956 women’s march.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Buthelezi was speaking at the party’s Women’s Day celebration in Pietermaritzburg yesterday. The celebration, meant to be held on Wednesday, was moved to yesterday “in light of exceptional circumstances” Buthelezi said, while referring to the vote of no confidence against President Jacob Zuma on Tuesday.
“As powerful as their message is, it is a symbolic message in the same way as the 1956 march to the Union Buildings. It will go down in history as a pivotal moment in SA.”
Buthelezi said the marches were proof that those who wanted Zuma out and decried the president’s “immoral leadership”, were no longer just from the opposition.
“A call for the president to step down has sounded from the heart of the ANC itself through the voice of more than 100 stalwarts and leaders of the president’s own party,” he said.
A dissident group of ANC stalwarts and veterans have urged the party’s MPs in an open letter to save the ANC by voting in support of the impending motion of no confidence in Parliament on Tuesday.
The Unite Behind coalition of civil society organisations and religious groups will call on MPs to vote in support of the no confidence motion when they march today.
Although Buthelezi said the marches would not remove Zuma, he said those who were complicit in protecting the president would be forced to consider the will of the people. 
And those representing the people inside of Parliament would be encouraged by the marches. “It is thus essential that every MP be in Cape Town, in particular ANC MPs, and that all our attention be focused on the vote of no confidence.”
Buthelezi said since Zuma took office, corruption had taken root in the government to the point that it had become hard to find a single multimillion rand tender that was not tainted by corruption.
“There has been one scandal after another, involving leaders at the highest level. 
“At the lowest level of local municipalities, governance is in disarray with financial mismanagement and wasteful expenditure eating away at the resources of the state,”  Buthelezi added. 
The culture of corruption had become pervasive throughout government, because the leader at the top had led by example, he said. 
Buthelezi pointed out that Zuma was “trampling on the constitution and ignoring his oath of office”.
He also reminded the women of the IFP of their strength in unity. “You were at your strongest when you fought together against the enemy of oppression. Make no mistake, the present enemy is no less dangerous,” he said.
The Mercury