The war against gender-based violence can only be won one battle at a time.
And, said radio personality, comedian and host of the upcoming The Mercury SAB Women’s Day lunch, Darren Maule, events like these helped make people aware of the issue.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
“Gender-based violence almost seems to be a giant monster that can’t be slain but I’m hoping that each person who attends walks away with one weapon, one sentence, one piece of information that resonates with them that they can add to their personal arsenal to help them win this battle,” Maule told The Mercury before the start of Women’s Month, which began on Tuesday.
The contentious theme is being explored at the event on Thursday.
According to the UN, it is estimated that 35% of women worldwide have experienced either physical and/or sexual intimate partner violence or sexual violence by a non-partner at some point in their lives. 
He said: “Gender violence is a global issue. Whenever we can engage seriously about it, I always jump at the opportunity. At the same time, we are also going to have lots of fun.”
Maule’s passion also came from his desire to create a better, safer world for his 9-year-old daughter.
Mercury editor Yogas Nair said domestic violence was the biggest cause of injury and death to women worldwide. 
“Every day, women are murdered, physically and sexually assaulted, threatened and humiliated by their partners, within their own homes,” said Nair.
“It is estimated that in South Africa at least 150 women are raped a day. And one out of every four women experiences domestic violence.
“As media we have a role to play by highlighting this issue through storytelling and creating awareness through events like this one.”
As part of the title’s social responsibility programme, the Mercury and SAB would donate R100 000 to three charities.
SAB corporate affairs director for South Africa Shobna Persadh said the event was aimed at creating awareness about gender-based violence and showing the company’s commitment to eradicating it.
“We are also working in communities to address these problems.”
The event would also feature an all-male panel.
The lunch – which would see women from all walks of life converge – was also about celebrating successful women.
One of these women, celebrity chef Siba Mtongana, will be treating the audience to a cooking demonstration and a copy of her recipe book Welcome To My Table.
The Mercury