Thirty-six KwaZulu-Natal women, survivors of gender-based abuse, graduated last week after completing a basic designing course.Edcon chief executive officer and managing director Bernie Brookes said the graduation was a culmination of hard work for their group and partners. The women had all at  some point previously stayed in shelters. “They were taught how to do basic design and provided with entrepreneurship skills. They were trained, educated and had their confidence built up so that they can create their own sustainable future and will be able to escape the cycle of abuse. “This is about breaking that cycle and moving out of the environment of a shelter, so that they can create their own self-worth and confidence. We saw that very much in the jobs the women did, with the quality of the attire they are wearing, and in their growing confidence,” Brookes said.The Edgars UNiTE Orange Day Campaign was launched last year with the goal of empowering women survivors of gender-based violence through skills development in fashion design and sewing through accredited training courses.SEWAFRICA college managing director Traci Mann said the  college was brought in to help empower the women, so that they could start making a living through the skills they learnt. “We then selected a range of garments, in which they were given a wide range of skills and allowed to be versatile. In addition, the women were given their own sewing machines to enable them to earn a living from the skills acquired,” said Mann.“Finding a job in the clothing industry can be a problem. There is a deepening struggle in the manufacturing sector, but the upside is the increase in the informal market. People are looking for more specialised garments. “Something more individualised and African. It also enables people who live in the townships who cannot afford to go to designers, to approach the graduates and ask for a product within their price range. There is a market for the skills they have.”The project saw 36 women from six shelters taking part in a design and product development challenge under the guidance and supervision of designer mentors Thembeka Vilakazi, Greg Wallis and Vanessa Pillay.The course began in June at the Edgars store in Dr Pixley KaSeme (West) Street, the Durban champion store for the campaign in KZN.UN South Africa representative Themba Kalua said the programme was part of the UN Women’s global campaign which was launched in 2008 with the aim of raising awareness on gender-based violence. “On the 25th of each month, we are encouraged to do something that strives to end abuse of women. “Women taken from different shelters have now been empowered. It involves women’s economic empowerment as a tool to addressing gender-based violence issues.”One of the programme participants said she had started the course knowing nothing about sewing. “I now love sewing and am prepared to make a living out of it,” she said.