Hotelier Siphiwe  Ngcobo is in good company among entrepreneurs such as Steve Jobs and Nikola Tesla, who made it to the top of their industries after being fired from their day jobs.Ngcobo, at just 37, operates a string of hotels and guest houses under his iLawu Hospitality Group which he founded after losing his job, opening a tuckshop in a container and venturing into the property sector as a small-time buyer.He is currently busy with a R10 million revamp of the iLawu Boutique Hotel (formerly Botanic Hotel) in Prestbury and owns the iLawu Inn and the iLawu Lodge, also in Pietermaritzburg, as well as a guest house in Newcastle. He is also opening a country lodge in Vryheid in February next year. His iLawu Food Services offers catering for weddings, special and corporate events in the province. The group employs 100 full-time staff, 50 part-time staff and 50 interns. Ngcobo’s entrepreneurial flair budded when he matriculated from Carter High School in Pietermaritzburg in 1998.From small business to a business empire“I started a company (TD Coolers), manufacturing ice lollies at home and selling them across the township in tuckshops and superettes. It seemed like a good opportunity because there was only one manufacturer,” Ngcobo said.“It boomed for six months. Then winter came and business started dying down, and I decided to further my studies,” he said.Ngcobo studied computer systems and then studied mechanical engineering at Technikon Northern Gauteng, but dropped out because of financial constraints. He got a job as a technician at Harmony Gold Mines and saved money to open an IT business on the side. He then took a post as a machine setter and operator at Hulamin, where he worked for five years.“The business focused on hardware and networking, but it did not take off. I lost my job at Hulamin. I was fired for poor performance and that was a turning point in my life,” Ngcobo said.Ngcobo is convinced he would not be where he is today if he had not been fired.“I had to move out of the flat I was renting and stay in my grandmother’s garage. I was looking for alternative employment, but was also introspecting on who I was and overviewing my life,” Ngcobo said.Within six months, he was reinstated at Hulamin after an appeal.Inspiring students to develop business instincts“I kept staying at my grandmother’s house and started a tuckshop from a container,” Ngcobo said.He hired someone to work in the tuckshop during the day and when he got home from work, he took over selling bread, milk, soap and other basics. “It was going extremely well. I was making R1 000 a day revenue,” Ngcobo said. Keen to buy a house, but unable to access a bank loan, he decided to invest in land in the township. “I started looking at vacant land and researching the owners. As soon as I got one piece of land, I pushed aside the idea of buying my house and bought more land. By 2008, I had a lot of the land and developers came to me,” Ngcobo said.He made a tidy sum buying and selling land and decided to “invest” it in a rented house in the Pieter- maritzburg CBD, which he converted into a bed ’n’ breakfast (B&B) in 2009, just in time for the Fifa 2010 World Cup. “When I started operating, I was everything – housekeeper, cook, auditor. It was a five-bedroom house, and when my rooms were fully booked I would sleep in my car,”  Ngcobo said.“When I started the B&B, I didn’t know anyone in Pietermaritzburg, so to be known I needed to create a brand from the outset. I branded my car and people thought I owned a huge lodge when it was just a five-room B&B,” Ngcobo said.He went on to buy his first hotel, the old Botanic Hotel in Prestbury which was facing closure and in which he initially invested R250 000 in 2011. He is converting it into a 100-bed four-star hotel with a new restaurant and a spa which will be completed on  September 1. He went on to buy the 40-bed Regal Inn in Chief Albert Luthuli Street, renaming it iLawu Inn. He also opened iLawu Lodge in Scottsville and iLawu Guesthouse in Newcastle.Ngcobo, selected as a finalist in the Entrepreneur of the Year  competition sponsored by Sanlam and Business Partners, attributes his success to finding his purpose and to wise financial decisions. “I’ve had a fair chance in my life and everything that I have done in business. I have never taken a cent, but have invested it back into the business,” Ngcobo said.“Now is a bit different from when I started. I am recognised and financed by banks, but as a start-up when you have not proved your model, no one wants to look at you. I ran a bank account and kept a paper trail to prove that the business was being run well,” Ngcobo said.