Tourism is expected to receive a much-needed boost after Mkhuze Airport, in northern KwaZulu-Natal, undergoes a R32-million  facelift.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
The venture was unveiled by the MEC for Economic Development, Tourism and Environmental Affairs Sihle Zikalala on Tuesday.
He said the airport’s “refurbishment” would see it creating its own globally recognised identity as safari enthusiasts would be able to fly into the King Shaka International Airport and thereafter take a direct flight to Mkhuze.
“We have taken a decision to upgrade the airport because it is strategically located in the prime tourism destination of the uMkhanyakude District which boasts the highest  concentration of game reserves in the country including Thanda, Phinda, uMkhuze, Pongola and Hluhluwe.”
The department explained in a statement that the upgrades would see the airport following the Skukuza model which served the Kruger National Park and many of the other surrounding reserves in Mpumalanga and Limpopo. 
Zikalala said the “grand vision” for Mkhuze was for the airport to achieve the  International Civil Aviation Organisation’s Category 3 status, where the aerodrome could accommodate up to 100-seater aircrafts.
“Once completed, the airport will also cater for freight aircraft, fuel supply to aircraft, pilot training, fire-fighting training, anti-poaching exercises and other related aviation activities.”
“I am glad to hear that already some potential investors are showing appetite for services at the airport. We want to get the airport to a state that makes it attractive for investment in the area. 
“The airport is surrounded by vacant land that makes provision for non-aviation  activities. However, we do  want to say that such development must not be to the  detriment of our environment or the wildlife which is abundant in this area.”
The launch, said the department, had also been attended by tour operators, hoteliers, bed and breakfast owners and business owners.
Ghost Mountain Inn manager Jean Toucher said the upgrade would assist tourism in the area. 
“We welcome the government’s decision to invest in our airport. I have no doubt that the airport will make it easier for tourists to access our world-class tourism sites.”
Dinizulu Safaris owner Martie Meintjes said the improvements would help tourists reach the far-flung area, adding that the location and remoteness had always been a “drawback”.
The Mercury