DURBAN - Makhosi Khoza has posted her daughter's business card containing her contact details and place of work on Facebook.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

This has caused alarm and concern from some of the ANC MP's Facebook friends as she has publicly said that her life and her family's lives have been threatened in recent times. The South African Police Service last month offered her protection after she had revealed on Facebook, threatening SMSes sent to her. She later declined protection from the police. 

The ANC MP, who was recently axed by the ruling party as the portfolio chairperson for the public service and administration committee. Read that story here. 

But that has not stopped Khoza from posting and tagging her daughter Zamasnama's details on social media. Zamasnama Khoza is an intern for an estate agency in Hillcrest, to the west of Durban. 

	A screenshot from Khoza's Facebook. We have blocked her contact details. 

Khoza said in her post: "My daughter Zamasnama Khoza has joined propertyCoZa in Hillcrest KZN as a new real estate agent. She is also currently busy with her first major development of 160 apartments. Contact her if you interested in investing or selling your property in Hillcrest".
Some on social media quickly questioned why she would publicly post her daughter's details given the threats she and her family have faced in recent months. 

A Facebook follower, Yamkela Fanisi said: "Initially I thought of asking you if this is not too much disclosure. Considering the political threats you face" 

Speaking to the Sunday Tribune on Thursday, Zamasnama, 25, said she understood the concern that was being raised but said her life had to go on despite the threats on her life.  

"All the details are on the website already, I can't stop my life because my mother is a political figure. The same details she has posted are on the car I drive, but I do understand the concern," she said.

Zamasnama revealed that she started at the estate agent last week and had asked her mother to publicise her. 
She said: "I had actually asked her to put it on. I have just started (as an estate agent), I am trying to get my name out".
CONCERN
Another person on Facebook, Marviz M Mhlongo said: "Uzwe umuntu ethi my family is in danger esuke lapho ebuye eposte ngayo ayipromoter.. kani yinikudlalwa ngathi yee". 
Mhlongo,  in a loose transalation, said he was confused why family members details were being posted when their lives were in danger. He then refers to the threats as a farce. 
Another Facebook user, Isiphephelo Silver, said: "Kodwa mam Khoza arent u scared of the Zumptas for yall daughter's life, phela u were the only one brave in the ZANC"..
Another Facebook user, Meisie Hunadi Maditsi, said: "Are you not exposing your daughter to those thugs who were threatening your life??"
UPDATE
Shortly after 4pm on Thursday, Makhosi Khoza wrote on Facebook: "My daughter is not a politician. She is a young hard working entrepreneur. Her love and passion for property business cannot stop because her mother is a politician. We prayed hard about this. Initially I was reluctant but after some discussions I conceded that she needs my support".Follow the Sunday Tribune on Facebook
 Follow the Sunday Tribune on Twitter 
SUNDAY TRIBUNE