The trial of the fraud-accused former headmaster of Glenwood High School, Trevor Kershaw, will not be getting under way any time soon.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
His legal team is turning to the high court, after the regional court threw out their request for more detailed information pertaining to the charges they are defending their client against.
Magistrate Judy Naidoo dismissed their application in Durban’s Special Commercial Crime Court on Wednesday, after which Kershaw’s advocate – Gideon Scheltema – said they would be taking her decision on review.
That process – which requires first that the tape recordings of proceedings thus far be transcribed – is expected to span several months.
Kershaw’s trial was scheduled to begin this month.
But on what was to be the first day, his legal team announced it was objecting to the charges.
According to the Criminal Procedure Act, a person accused of a crime can object to the charges against him or her at any time before entering a plea of guilty or not guilty.
If his or her objection succeeds, the court can order the prosecution to amend the charges or to furnish the defence with additional  information.
If the prosecution does not comply with the court’s order, the charges can be quashed.
In Kershaw’s case, his lawyers wanted the prosecution to explain exactly what constituted each of the 1 623 counts he faced.
As things stood, they said, they had simply been given 17 lever arch files and thousands of electronic files which they were told contained details.
These were so voluminous and complex, Scheltema said, it was virtually impossible to make sense of them.
Public prosecutor Wendy O’Brien said the State had “bent over backwards” to try to provide the defence with everything it had requested and had not held back  anything.
“In fact, Scheltema’s argument is the opposite: he’s saying the State provided too many particulars,” she said.
In handing down her ruling, magistrate Naidoo said on Wednesday that the State clearly relied upon “a particular set of documents and witnesses to prove its case against  Kershaw”.
“The specific documents have been referred to several times and it is clear which documents are being relied on to prove all the charges,” she said.
She said the defence had enough time to peruse these documents properly.
“It just remains for the defence to sit back, marry the documents relied upon to the specific charges against the accused and properly prepare its defence,” she said.
She said in cases like this, voluminous documentation was required.
“This is not the first case of this nature in a court of law,” she said.
The charges against Kershaw relate to work-related claims, totalling around R5 million, that he made from Glenwood during his time there.
He was arrested and charged last year, shortly after he had resigned from his position at the prestigious all boys’ school.
He is expected to make a brief appearance before the court again in October, for his lawyers to provide the court with feedback and the status of their review application.
The Mercury