The line-up for the next #Durbs Comedy Night has been finalized and is set to see some of SA’s finest comedy talent hit Durban stage.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Sifiso Nene, Thenjiwe, Carvin Goldstone, Richelieu Beaunoir and more are all set to get you laughing.
The popular #Durbs Comedy Night series has grown since inception with each new staging bringing in fresh talent and jokes to add some funny to your world.
Firing up his audience with his unique brand of humour, Sifiso Nene holds the title of the first winner of the popular reality TV show, So You Think You're Funny. 
This comedian has come a long way since his humble beginnings in Empangeni, KZN. For two years on a row he scooped the coveted Comics Choice Award, which is voted for by audiences.
Widely regarded as one of the best comedians in South Africa, Richelieu B cemented this view when he won the 2016 Comedy Central Roast Battle at Parker’s, Monte Casino. The poker-faced comedian comes from Durban and now resides in Johannesburg where he enjoys entertaining audiences of all dynamics from the comedy club scene to corporate functions, approaching each engagement with the same enthusiasm.
Nominated for a Comics's Choice Award in the Audience Choice Category and the popular host of the Aweh Mzansi Comedy Tour; Richelieu's ability to adapt to his surroundings make him perfect at corporate events. Performing on the biggest stages in the country, Richelieu is well equipped to hold his own alongside the greats in South African comedy.
Thenjiwe resigned from her day job as a lawyer when her heart led her to comedy. Today the popular award winning comedienne is a viral sensation with and array of her YouTube comedy skits spreading like wild fire.
All topics are fair game for this comedy diva. 
Carvin Goldstone is back from an 11 city National Comedy Tour and performances of his ever popular one man show, Coloured President, on the MSC Sinfonia.
Armed with a mix of throwbacks and fresh jokes, he's fired up with the funny. 
These comedians are ready to get the laughs rolling at the next #Durbs Comedy Night series tomorrow (August 19) at the Garden Court Hotel, Marine Parade (DBN) at 8.15pm.
Tickets are R100 and are available here or reserve seats via 083 095 6595.