More than 4 300 SA patients are awaiting organ or tissue donations and, say experts, the lifesaving assistance often comes too late – or not at all.  The Mercury talks to two Durban families about their struggles as Organ Donor Month comes to a close.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
For Janet Legemaate – whose son Matthew, 19, has been awaiting a heart and bi-lateral lung transplant for almost seven years – organ donation is an “amazing legacy”.
“Matthew was born with a congenital heart defect and has had five open heart surgeries. He now lives on oxygen permanently.”
Legemaate described organ donation as a gift that people can leave behind. 
“I often ask people if they, or a family member needed a transplant, would they be willing to accept one in order to live? Based on a person’s answer they often consider registering as an organ and tissue donor and discuss this with their families,” Legemaate said.
The decision by Janine Magree – who lost her son, Bryn, 16, earlier this year – to donate his organs has the potential to affect 57 lives. 
Her son collapsed at a local gym, and was taken to King Edward VIII Hospital where his heart was re-started after it stopped for a second time late that night.
“We decided to donate Bryn’s organs after I registered as a donor. We had  the donation conversation as a family, and having previously  chatted to Janet, and having known families who waited too long to donate – and the organs were no longer viable. I knew this was the right thing to do.”
Magree said it was important to ensure that you talked about your last wishes with your family. 
“Nobody plans when they’re going to die and you never expect a young person to lose their life. Death is something we all must face one day, so why shroud it in mystery and make it a scary concept? Rather know what your loved ones want so you have some level of control over what is otherwise a harrowing time for a family.”
Out of the more than 4 000 adults and children awaiting the surgery in South Africa, fewer than 600 transplants are done each year.
Organ Donor Foundation executive director Samantha Nicholls said the situation was desperate.
“Many patients die as a result of not receiving an organ or wait a very long time – on average a patient on dialysis who doesn’t have a family member or friend who can donate a kidney to them will wait five to eight years for a kidney.”
She said many people harboured fears or misconceptions or felt it was against their religion.
“In all these cases, if the public are educated properly, many of these fears can be  addressed,” Nicholls said.
Some were under the impression that the procedures involved in donating organs were costly.
“There is absolutely no cost involved in registering to be an organ and tissue donor  and actually donating your organs and tissue at the time of death. 
From the moment brain stem death has been declared and the family has given  consent for organ donation, the hospital or the state takes on all medical expenses going forward, so your family or estate will not be left with a big medical bill due to organ donation after your death.”
Many were also concerned that their bodies would be left disfigured.
“Medical professionals treat the donor’s body with absolute respect and surgeons will stitch up the body carefully in the same way as they would after any other operation. 
“The donor could even have an open casket funeral and no one would know that he or she was a hero and donated his or her organs and tissue.”
The process of procuring organs and tissue from the donor, she said, only took a couple of hours and then the donor family was free to continue with the funeral arrangements. 
“It does not delay arrangements and with families whose culture or religion prescribes that the body is buried within a certain time frame these requirements are met.”
Nicholls said it was a legal requirement that two doctors independent of the transplant team did a series of internationally recognised tests to confirm brain stem death before a donor’s organs and tissue could be procured.
She explained that many potential organ donors were under the impression that if they were in an accident – and the medical professionals knew they were an organ donor – they would not try to save them.
“But organ and tissue donation only takes place once every effort has been made to save your life and death has been legally declared. The transplant teams are a completely separate team to the trauma staff,” she said.
Nicholls encouraged all South Africans to register.
“Registering is showing your intention but, ultimately, your family is approached at the time of your death and medical professionals will assess the viability of your organs and tissue. So we ask everyone to register and leave the decision to the doctors at the time of your death,” Nicholls said.
For more information, click here or call 0800 22 66 11.
The Mercury