Durban - Missing plans have become the latest point of concern for beachfront water sport clubs, with the threat of demolition of their clubhouses now hanging over their heads.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

This has become the concern after all four clubs, the Point Yacht Club, Durban Paddleski Club, Durban Undersea Club and Durban Ski Boat Club based at Vetch’s Pier on South Beach, were asked by the developers, Durban Point Development Company (DPDC), to submit approved building plans regarding the storage sheds and buildings currently occupied by the clubs.

This follows a notice issued by Ethekwini Municipality to the DPDC which states that during an inspection of the property, “it was revealed that storage sheds and various formal buildings (housing Durban Ski Boat Club, Durban Undersea Club, Point Yacht Club and Durban Paddle Ski Club) have been erected without the prior approval of the local authority”.

The notice goes on to state that the clubs must demolish or submit a building plan application within 30 days in respect of the referred buildings.

On Monday, the development company advised the clubs of the municipal requirements, stating, “We record that the DPDC has no such plans in its possession and hereby request that each of the clubs provide any such approved building plans that they have within their possession within seven (7) days”, failing which they will be obliged to comply with the municipality notice and demolish the buildings.

Commodore of the Point Yacht Club Craig Millar said they had taken in copies of the existing building plans earlier in the year, but they appear to be missing.

“Fortunately we have a full copy of the plans with a reference number and the engineer’s comments.The microfilmed copy was at the municipality offices where we copied it just a few months ago, but when we went in three days ago, we were told the plans were missing. Something very untoward has happened,” said Millar.

Chairman of the Point Watersports Club and Durban Undersea Club Cuane Hall could not be reached for comment and the Durban Point Development Company did not respond to a request for comment.

With the development of the new promenade, the clubs were expected to vacate their current building on August 8 for a temporary building provided by the developers. According to the clubs, the temporary building has yet to be constructed.
 The Independent on Saturday