DURBAN – Let’s mix it up with a spot of tennis, at the Miami Open. Look for some Swiss flavour, with Roger Federer as 3/1 favourite, Stan Wawrinka at 9/1, but don’t rule out Japan’s Kei Nishikori at 7/1 to put an Eastern spanner in the works!ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

‘Au revoir’ St Bernie Ecclestone! It’s time for a new fat cat at Formula 1’s top table, which restarts in Oz. After the brat Nico Rosberg took a sho’t left, it’s time for a new combo at McLaren.

I foresee much more of the same, with Hamilton leading, Bottas in tow and Daniel Ricciardo, Sebastian Vettel and Max Verstappen all hunting for the last podium place.

The real race is for second and third come season’s end.

The Australian GP is early on Sunday, and bookies have Lewis as a sure thing at 11/100, with Bottas a solid 4/1. Danny and Max are 10s, with Seb at 7/2. Look out for a cheeky upset!

Another topsy-turvy rugby weekend awaits, with results all over like our temperamental Sharks.

First up it’s the Crusaders and the Force in Christchurch. Force are the big -19 point outsiders, but they have a fair record in this fixture, having won twice and drawn once in the last seven encounters.

This game averages below 40 points, which supports the case for those looking at the +19 Force. This is against the odds – and pretty irresponsible of me (as I do), but take a dip and get a head start on the weekend.

For those with more sense than I, and fancy the +19 points due to the very evident record, play the game by all means.

The Aussie derby is too tight for comfort, so sense says go with the home side and walk away. The maverick in me smells an upset, though! Eish!

The Blues and Bulls are puzzling hard, so this could be tricky. The bookies are a little harsh on the Bulls, at a -11 point spread. Let’s catch them out, as Tana’s boys have been hopeless by Kiwi standards.

Bulls outright are priced at 4/1, so go in on this – it’s payday vele. Maybe make it a Bulls, Rebels – double hijack. It gives you 14/1!

The average score in this match-up is over 55 points, maybe look at over points

Highlanders (6/10) travel to the Brumbies 13/10, and a straight win is a good thing, or -3 points at 9/10.

Stormers should go Rush Hour on the Sunwolves in Singapore. The -22 points spread is a big call away, but I say gooi, papa!

Lions away to Kings should be a try fest and recent records have Lions winning this by three or four tries. The spread is at -25 points, and that’s right on the button. Back those Lions!

Sharks take on their bogey side Cheetahs in Bloem, and we can only but hope they sneak four points.

The Jaguars must chow the Reds in Argentina.

It’s an international break in football, but it looks like the best has come already, with a farewell goal from Lukas Podolski to down England.

The best on the go is Ireland at 14/10 vs Wales 22/10, Northern Ireland at 13/10 vs Norway at 22/10 and Scotland at 14/10 vs Slovenia 22/10. No goal-floods, but perhaps some upsets.

Look for a friendly bookie who offers double bets and get in on Gareth Bale to score and a Welsh win or draw.
Gareth Bale (centre) is a good bet to get a goal for Wales. Photo: Matthew Childs, Action Images via Reuters


For Norway, go same way as the Welsh, but look for Sheffield Wednesday’s hitman Danny Lafferty to score for Northern Ireland. I’d have to back the Scots to win at home, as they are historically a hard nut to crack.

Finally, the Proteas round up their Kiwi road-trip, but beware the wounded Black Cap. There is rain (surprise, surprise) forecast in Hamilton, so the Bones fancy a draw, especially with Quinny ‘The Rock’ likely to miss out.

It would be just dandy if Australia ‘Donald Trumped’ the Indians, too, but I fear Kohli and Co will get up and do the business.

We’ll deal with them in the summer!

Sharp!

The Mercury