THANKS for the memories Arsene. Twenty years, six months and two days in charge of Arsenal (2/1), take on Manchester City 13/10, on Sunday.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

This is Arsenal’s worst team and season in a decade. With a potential loss on Sunday, this must mean tickets for Arsene. Uncertainty at the Emirates has become a sideshow, Arsene has lost the players and now the fans. 

Those fans still saying “In Arsene we trust”, are part of the problem. Surely ringing around Emirates all day Sunday, from the faithful Gooners, must be chants singing: “We want you to go, we want you go ooh – Arsene Wenger, we want you to go!!”

Is this the final curtain for Wenger? Arsene has no Premier league title in 13 years, knocked out of Champions league at last 16 stage for the last 7 seasons, and now a good chance of no Champions League (his saviour for the past 9 years). 

My dear manager (who I have praised for years), it’s over baba – WENGER OUT! “We want Wenger out, say we want Wenger out!”, “We want Wenger out, say we want Wenger out!” 

Arsenal has 6 losses in the last 9 games, Sanchez (top goal scorer) and others are unhappy (as shown in West Brom game – pure disgrace!), surely a loss on Sunday will reduce the ‘20 year veteran’ manager to an ordinary “Citizen” himself? 

Allegri at 3/1 and Simeone 12/1, get your boots, bags and bank account ready – we need you over in London. Stan Kroenke, where are you chief? Open up your vault off money and get some players and a new manager on your private jet ASAP, It’s enough now! This is damaging the mighty Arsenal brand. 

Super Sunday’s games are at opposite ends of the table, both vitally important. Swansea (17th) take on Middlesbrough (19th), and The Citizens (3rd) vs the Gooners (6th) in Manchester. Scrumptious Sunday roast and Yorkshire pudding, no need for the gravy, as these games will serve up the real sauce. 

My heart says Gooners and Borough (to make race even tighter), but the Bones' call is a home win to the Swans and away win to ‘The Citizens’, with goals over 2.5 in both.  The “Pre-Augusta” party at the Golf club of Houston is also on. Jordan Spieth will be aiming to tidy up his game for the season's first major, just days away. Spieth is one of the favourites priced at 7/1, he is playing the week prior to The Masters’ (as usual), which clearly it grafts for the lightie. 

He has to sharpen his utensils before his ‘Appointment with Augusta’s Aliens’, which caused his 2016 Masters Meltdown on the 12th. Let’s hold that banter for next week’s April Fools edition. Bones thrown, Imphepho burnt, and dololo here we go. 

A couple players like a bit of Texas golf, so look at last year’s runner-up in old Billy Horschel at 50/1, maybe a little Philly Mick (who seems to be on song) at 25/1. Ryan Palmer is at dladla, so he should be “Connie”, a nice win/place dab at 150/1 and 12/1 respectively. Jimmy Walker “my man” is always rearing his head, look at him at 25/1. 

Other than that, Imphepho shows a real loner or two coming from the wilderness (win or place), try Robert Allenby at 500/1 or Danny Lee at 150/1.The line-up is undeniably strong, but does not feature the world’s best in the rankings, nor this season’s dazzlers in DJ, Hideki and Justin ‘T’. Enjoy the build up to the year’s 1st Major.  The razzle dazzle of Super rugby continues, pity about the level of play barring New Zealand teams. So no need to go through all the games every week from now on. On that point, look at all New Zealand sides to win but watch out for those crazy spreads the bookies have these matches at. All the matches, excepting the Crusaders (at -7), are between -15 and -22 points spreads, which is a ‘Wutang’ (there’s a “couple” of them). 

Seeing as the New Zealand teams are playing all the Australian teams barring the Chiefs match-up, maybe this minus spreads may come "RIIGHT”. Are the Sharks going to make us proud come Sunday morning, and become South Africa’s darlings? 

They made it look relatively easy last week against Cheetahs, on that cabbage patch (those ‘bearded bikers’ deserve more). Both the Cheetahs and Sharks are +10 on the spread, bones show the away teams to beating the spreads. 

For those ball and racquet fans lookout for a new Miami Open winner, come Monday morning! Deuces kids, Clairvoyant Out!
Mercury