Durban - Zulu king Goodwill Zwelithini has challenged three Brics countries to use  the multinational platform to benefit ordinary people.
The king was addressing a Zulu-Chinese Cultural Promotion Association event in Johannesburg earlier this week.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The partnership will see China working with the Royal Household to promote cultural heritage and tourism between China and South Africa. 

China and South Africa are Brics members, along with Brazil, Russia and India . 

“Previously, we witnessed a situation, whereby these very significant relationships between our governments such as Brics formation bilateral agreements end up being talks and signatories that do not benefit people direct,” he said.

Zwelithini said Brics should extend to “people-to-people” relationships.

“It is a fact that while governments come and go, people remain, thus it is important to invest into a partnership that is beyond a sitting government,” he said.  

He said while Brics played an important role in creating political and economical relations among government, “leaders should not lose sight of the importance of involving people”. 

Zwelithini said South Africa should strengthen its relationship with China, as the country had already overtaken America’s economy.

He said the visit by Chinese President Xi Jinping in 2015, which resulted in 26 agreements worth R84 billion, should be used to address South Africa’s challenges such as poverty, unemployment and inequality. 

He said even before the existence of Brics, the Zulu and Chinese nations had created relationships, and that the two should continue “this solid partnership”. “For my people who are predominantly in KwaZulu-Natal but spread across many other provinces, I need to emphasise that, they need to be involved seriously on matters of trade, whereby we need to identify products and services that can be traded between our two cultures,” the king said.

He said as part of expanding cultural relations, Chinese Mandarin and Zulu languages should be learnt by young people  “as it is easy to do business when you speak someone’s language”.

He invited members of the Chinese government to a commemoration of the founder of the Zulu nation, “King Shaka the Great”, in September. 

The king said Zulu and Chinese people wanted peace and prosperity. 

“They want protection for their families and countries. 

“Both Zulus and Chinese people appreciate modernity but most importantly are jealous about their rich cultural heritage,” he said. 
THE MERCURY