Durban – Nehawu has threatened strike action which could delay the release of bodies to bereaved families, should their demands for mortuary workers not be addressed by the Department of Health.
Phakamani Ndunakazi, provincial secretary of the National Health Education and Allied Workers Union (Nehawu), on Sunday said workers would embark on lunchtime pickets while the union met the department. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Should the talks not go their way, a full-blown strike was imminent. 

“If our engagements don’t bear fruit it can’t be business as usual,” said Ndunakazi. “We have been very lenient for too long because we understand that the service provided by these workers involves doing things in a dignified manner. But we cannot continue to allow workers being subjected to these working conditions.” 

These included allegedly broken air conditioning and equipment, and irregularities related to rosters, overtime pay and lack of danger pay, and not having protective wear. 

Post-mortems are meant to be conducted by doctors and the workers assist, however Nehawu said workers were also dissecting bodies. These are among the grievances believed to have led to mass absenteeism as protest at the Park Rynie mortuary recently. 

Health MEC Dr Sibongiseni Dhlomo rolled up his sleeves in that instance and conducted post-mortems himself to help out. 

There were 17 bodies moved to the Port Shepstone mortuary, where staff also called in sick, and Dhlomo had to turn to police to assist. 

Forensic pathology services was a police function until 1996 when the department of health took it over. 

Health head of department Dr Sifiso Mtshali believes staff in the Port Shepstone mortuary did not come to work because of the overload of work and not because they were joining the Park Rynie industrial action. 

He said there had not been similar action in Pinetown. “The only full-time pathologist there had requested leave to go to a conference, it had nothing to do with worker grievances.”

Mtshali acknowledged disruptions but said the department was trying to improve working conditions at the 39 mortuaries in the province.

On Friday he met mortuary managers “to look at gaps within the service. Some of the issues related to standardisation of rosters and salaries, but the aim is to resolve issues once and for all. Regarding issues of implementation of agreements made at a national level, we need to look at why they were not implemented in KZN”, said Mtshali. 

The issues plaguing mortuary workers were similar to those faced by paramedics.

“We have mainly been prioritising hospitals, but we are now also focusing on EMS and forensic pathology,” said Mtshali. He said strike action was premature as they were engaging with the unions. 

He and Ndunakazi confirmed a meeting this week where Mtshali was expected to give feedback on his meeting with mortuary managers. 

DA spokesperson for health Dr Imran Keeka accused Dhlomo and the department of “sitting on their hands – it is difficult to comprehend why the MEC and his department continue to ignore workers’ grievances”.

Keeka said the DA had written to Premier Willies Mchunu, suggesting Dhlomo take permanent leave if he wishes to “continue working in mortuaries. We have not changed our view.

“If the crisis earlier this month did not tell the premier he has a big problem within KZN’s health department, he is guilty of protecting MEC Dhlomo and his officials,” said Keeka.

He said the party would again write to Mchunu.
The Mercury