Durban - Security has been beefed up in anticipation of thousands of people marching for “economic freedom” in the Ballito CBD on Thursday.
The march has been organised by the ANC Youth League (ANCYL) in the greater KwaDukuza region and will coincide with the opening of the Ballito Junction mall.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The league has claimed that the developers of the new mall did not consider young people for supplier contracts and to be tenants at the mall.

Sifiso Zulu, spokesperson for the KwaDukuza Municipality, said there was no indication of possible disruptions and violence. 

However, he said given the number of marchers expected, the public order policing unit, other police units and the municipality’s crime prevention and traffic departments would be monitoring the situation. 

Dave Charles, chairperson of the Dolphin Coast Residents and Ratepayers Association, said they supported the right for people to march, as long as it was peaceful. 

“It is inevitable that there will be some disruption. As long as it doesn’t unnecessarily disrupt people trying to get where they need to. We are always supportive of positive initiatives,” he said. 

Charles said he had engaged with the ANCYL who had committed to an orderly march. 

Hectic

“The opening of the mall is a huge event so we are prepared for an extra thousand people. The march will add to that. It’s undoubtedly going to be a hectic day so some businesses have rather chosen to close, but this is in fear that traffic will be gridlocked.”

As to speculation of the march turning violent, Charles said there would be a large security contingent to put in line any possible “rogue elements”.

Nico Viljoen, North Coast operations manager for Marshall Security, said they would be on standby and were bringing in extra crew and vehicles. 

Brad John, manager of Ballito Coastal Hire, said they would close shop, due to logistics rather than security concerns. 

He anticipated it could be so congested that he would not be able to make deliveries.

“I’d be lying if I said I wasn’t nervous, but it’s an organised march for legitimate concerns, so we are confident there will be no looting, trashing or stealing. It’s just frustrating to lose a day of business,” said John. 

Patrick Flanagan, director of the Ballito Junction Consortium, said they had boosted security and would deal with any threat in the appropriate manner. 

“We are incredibly excited about the opening of this massive investment in the area, which will have a huge social and direct economic impact and has created a huge number of jobs.”

Flanagan said they respected the marchers’ rights. “We have confidence in the security and police. We are not anticipating a confrontation, but we are prepared to deal with disruption.”

Zulu said that despite the ANCYL’s concerns, the mall’s developers had an agreement with the municipality to hire local labour. 

“They have met their commitments with the municipality,” Zulu added.
The Mercury