Durban - A humble, compassionate and dignified gentleman is how Zuleika Mayat, 90, remembers Ahmed Kathrada.
It was because of his compassion that Kathrada wrote a letter of condolence from Robben Island after the passing of Mayat’s husband, Dr Mohammed Mayat, and sister Sakina Bibi Mal in 1979. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

This started an exchange of letters, which would ultimately be compiled into the book called Dear Ahmedbhai Dear Zuleikhabehn. 

“I just knew Ahmed from the newspapers, I had seen him from a distance but I never really knew him well. He was a friend of my brother, so when my husband and my sister died in the accident, Ahmed wrote to my brother,” said Mayat.

The letter took so long to arrive that her brother, Abdulhak “Bis” Bismilla, had already returned to Canada, where he lived at the time. 

“The family said I should reply. So I wrote to Ahmed thanking him for thinking of us, and in the end I said: ‘Is there anything I can do for you?’ After a long time, a letter came back, requesting news of a friend or so on. I replied, then he would reply, and this went on. But I knew that the letters would be censored, so all the letters he wrote I have, of course, and the letters I wrote, I typed on a typewriter with a copy: I sent one and the other copy I kept,” said Mayat. 

Years later she was approached by then University of KwaZulu-Natal professors Goolam Vahed and Thembisa Waetjen who wanted to write a book on the Women’s Cultural Group, which Mayat had co-founded in 1953. 

It was during interviews for this book in her home in Clare Estate that the professors came across the letters to and from Kathrada. 

“They were amazed and said, ‘What are you sitting with this for? It should be published’. So I phoned Ahmed and I said ‘What shall we do?’ He said ‘Of course give it to them’, and this is how the book came to be published,” said Mayat. 

That was in 2009.

In the letters, Kathrada wanted to know of his friends outside prison, how they and the anti-apartheid organisations were doing. “I had to do it in such a way that the censors wouldn’t pick it up as anything political; we had to use code names. Fatima and Ismail Meer would give me the code names and say, ‘He will understand when you use these code names’. That’s how it was done,” she said. 

She and her husband were politically active but “in the background” and not “high profile” like the Meers. 

“We were in the shadows, whatever they couldn’t do openly, we did it quietly. Like Nelson (Mandela) couldn’t stay with them, so Ismail would phone my husband and say: ‘That petrol station is selling cheap petrol at 5 o’clock’ so we would know Nelson would be waiting there. Very often Fatima had to hide her books, so she would hide them with me. When she had to escape one night when they were going to raid her house, she came to our house.”

Mayat said they had to be quiet, and it was better that way so that everyone didn’t get caught. 

But her home was also raided three times. “The security police would come early in the morning, with the stamp, stamp of their feet, and they would look under the bed to see if anyone is hiding there. 

“My one son and my nephew were teenagers and they were sleeping in their room, and the security police would go and feel if their beard was growing, whether they are grown up men.” Although these were terrifying times, Mayat now giggles at the “silly” antics of security police and the apartheid government. 

The Mayats were denied passports, except for one time when her husband was allowed to go to a conference overseas. But even then, it was only a ploy by the apartheid government to show the international world how well their philosophy of “equal but separate” was working. 

Over the 10 years they wrote to each other, Mayat met Kathrada once while he was imprisoned on Robben Island, and then when he was released. The pair kept in touch over the years. 

“For me, Ahmed Kathrada is what Saadi (of Shiraz), a philosopher and poet of Islam, described when he said: ‘When you are born, you came crying (a baby) - everyone around you was laughing. Live such a life, that when you die you go laughing and everybody around you is crying.’ This was Ahmed Kathrada’s life, he brought joy to everyone around him through his own suffering. He deserves his peace now.” 
The Mercury