DURBAN - The international break came at the right time for Maritzburg United and Golden 
Arrows, while AmaZulu also welcomed the breather in the second tier.
Arrows were a patchwork outfit of young and old, and some new players, before the Fifa break intervened almost a fortnight ago. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The Durban side enjoys a slight reprieve with two veteran internationals in Kagisho Dikgacoi and Malawian striker Chiukepo Msowoya likely to be in the squad for the 
weekend’s visit of Highlands Park.

Dikgacoi got an opportunity when Arrows faced Bafana Bafana in a training run last week. He showed no ill effects of the knee surgery and back injury that sidelined him 
recently. 

Vuyani Ntanga, Wayde Jooste and Andile Fikizolo were among the others who featured against South Africa in uMlazi last week after a period of inactivity.

The return of the experienced campaigners will be a welcome boost for coach Clinton Larsen who was also without frontline pair Danny Phiri and Limbikani Mzava. 

The Zimbabwean midfielder and Malawian defender are still doubtful, together with long-term injury casualty Lehlohonolo Nonyane.

The Team of Choice had other issues to deal with, largely off-the-field following the resignation of Roger de Sa during the international break.

The second coaching 
resignation of the season for Maritzburg - German Ernst Middendorp exited in November - means assistant Fadlu Davids takes charge as caretaker coach for the second time this campaign.

If it’s anything like the first time, then Maritzburg will be happy.

During his first spell, Davids oversaw five games, in which they drew thrice and won twice. The timing of De Sa’s departure was ideal in that Davids had an opportunity to drill the squad according to his vision. 

Maritzburg also welcome back Kenyan defender Brian Onyango, who featured in his country’s 2-1 home win over DR Congo.

Maritzburg host fellow strugglers Ajax Cape Town 
in the City of Choice on Saturday. 

The Urban Warriors are winless in seven games, 
although the break would have been useful for coach Stanley Menzo to iron out problem areas.

In the First Division, AmaZulu coach Joey Antipas needed the break to work with his youngsters as they prepare for a shot at the play-offs.

With nine matches to play, Antipas said they would give it a full tilt and hope for the best. 

AmaZulu travel to Stellenbosch this weekend, where they come up against their former striker Mame Niang.
Mercury