DURBAN – We can take it as said that all players’ ears have been hotly warmed in both the Shark and Cheetahs camps ahead of Saturday’s big derby in Bloemfontein.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The Cheetahs were walloped by the Jaguars in Argentina, the Sharks bordered on pathetic before scrambling to a win in Durban against the Kings.

So, which side will pitch for the 5pm kickoff on Saturday?

The Cheetahs that were outstanding in the intensity they brought to beat the Bulls in the Free State capital in round two, or the Sharks side that were superb in beating the Brumbies in Canberra and then the Waratahs in Durban?

“I would say that on both sides of the camp, all players have been revved up and the match is going to be a cracker between two sides determined to show they are the real deal,” Sharks coach Robert du Preez said.

“We were not happy with that performance at home against the Kings before close to 20 000 people,” the coach said.

“We have put it behind us, we are energised, our meetings and practices have been short and sweet, and we are ready to go.”

Du Preez has dropped last week’s debutant flyhalf Benhard Janse van Rensburg for Curwin Bosch, who is free to move from fullback to flyhalf because Clement Poitrenaud is over a groin injury and able to resume in the No 15 jersey.

“It was very hard to drop Benhard after just one game,” Du Preez said of the 20 year-old from Leopards country.

“I do not like doing this. This game is very important for us, and Curwin has been playing there all the time and giving us good reward.

“While I am very happy with Curwin to be there, last week it would have been difficult for Benhard or any other 10 to play well and give us shape on attack given that we did not perform up front, especially in the set-phases.

“We will hear a lot more about Benhard and he will spend time now with the SA Under-20 squad. That name is not going to go away,” Du Preez added.

“It is exciting to have him and Inny Radebe going forward.”

Interestingly, Du Preez added that it was his fervent hope that a successor to the old Vodacom Cup would emerge to give game time to the players in his greater squad.

“We need to get another competition running concurrently with Super Rugby,” he said.

“It is a big frustration for coaches and players.”

Du Preez has refreshed his front row for the match against the Cheetahs, bringing back rested contracted Springboks in props Coenie Oosthuizen and Tendai Mtawarira.
Coach Robert du Preez says a great pre-season won't count for much if the Sharks don't play to their potential. Photo: Samuel Shivambu, BackpagePix


Former Bok Chiliboy Ralepelle continues at hooker because of an ongoing injury to Franco Marais.

“We are at full strength for a hugely important game,” said Du Preez. “We know the Cheetahs will be playing that great brand of rugby they played to beat the Bulls, and we have to be ready for that, and then go one better.

“They have their captain back in (centre) Francois Venter, they love to attack, so our defence has to be very sharp but also very disciplined,” the coach said.

“In terms of getting our game back on track, talk is cheap. I have told that to the guys. We have had a great pre-season; there has been a good start to the season.

“We should have beaten the Reds and have not lost since; there have been very good signs of what we can do, there is a lot of talent. But it is easy to talk about these things as opposed to putting them into action.”
 The Mercury