On Tuesday, the President of the Republic, Jacob Zuma, visited Umhlabuyalingana Local Municipality as part of efforts aimed at fighting cross-border crime. He was accompanied by Premier Willies Mchunu and members of the provincial executive council.
 On August 12, 2012, the provincial government convened a cross-border crime summit at Inkosi Albert Luthuli International Convention Centre. This summit, attended by ministers from neighbouring countries, law-enforcement agencies, leaders of society and NGOs was convened to canvass views about how to prevent cross-border crime. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

It was one of the most important forums that resolved to ensure the co-operation of all stakeholders.

Rural communities living on our borders are under a huge yoke of poverty and bear the burden of stock theft and car hijackings. 

The problem has heightened tension between South Africans and our brothers and sisters from Mozambique in particular. 

The premier emphasised that the role of the police was critical in fighting cross-border crime, but would be enhanced by the co-operation between other departments across all spheres of government.

He stated that an orderly and legal movement of people and effective cross-border trade would contribute towards socio-economic development in the region. It is detrimental to all interests if there is an unco-ordinated approach towards dealing with these issues.

Therefore, the president’s intervention will strengthen this co-operation with various government departments looking set to play their role in creating an environment that will result in the eradication of cross-border crime.

Critically, as the Southern African Development Community moves towards a free trade area, cross-border crime presents challenges. 

Our province is home to more than 11million people and is located on the eastern seaboard of our country, sharing borders with Mozambique, Lesothoand Swaziland. 

It is reported that SADC, the Common Market for East and Southern Africa (Comesa) and the East African Community, all comprising 26 countries, form Africa’s biggest free trade bloc which will eventually create a single continent-wide market estimated to be worth more than $1trillion (R13.1trillion). These 26 countries have a combined population of 590million and an aggregate GDP of $860billion.

While we push for economic integration through free trade, it is unfortunate that the international criminal networks are celebrating as they believe they will have access to this lucrative market. Reports suggest that the criminal groups have gained unlimited access to various trans-national networks using sophisticated technology and in most cases are assisted by corrupt officials.

Syndicates

There are lucrative criminal enterprises operating in Africa, Europe and Asia who have been, for many years trading in endangered species such as rhino horns, ivory, abalone, copper, precious wood, precious stones and metals.

In charge of these enterprises are professional kingpins who recruit vulnerable unemployed people, especially the youth for illicit activities that generate millions of rand for them. 

With operations in cities including Cape Town, Joburg, Nelspruit, KwaBulawayo, Harare, Durban, Maputo, Nampula, Beira, Manzini and Luanda, the kingpins do not work as competitors but collaborate. It is alleged that they have networks in organisations including Customs, Home Affairs, Sars, Department of Transport licensing offices and insurance companies.

In his State of the Province address, Mchunu undertook to root out corruption involving government employees. 

He pleaded for the co-operation of the private sector, stating that society must assist by not offering bribes.

Young people are recruited for housebreakings, shoplifting, armed robberies and hijackings of luxury motor vehicles and trucks which are sold to buyers and dealerships in Africa and overseas. They use the latest technology to sell stolen cars and parts to international markets through a manipulated shipping system and unmonitored routes.
Ndabezinhle Sibiya Picture: Supplied
Many desperate young people from tertiary institutions are recruited – given fraudulent IDs, payslips and credit cards to hire vehicles from legitimate rental companies and end up not returning them. If not dismantled in chop shops, these vehicles are often sold to other provinces and neighbouring countries.

In various crime-fighting initiatives, including the Crime Summit convened by the premier at Dube Trade Port in November, it was reported that some of these skilled young people work as insurance brokers, transporters and specialised artisans who change vehicle identification numbers and other defining features.

As government, we have been informed that is a new trend wherein vehicles arrive as completely broken down parts from their original countries only to be assembled in another country. 

It is reported that vehicles from Kenya enter Tanzania through Kilimanjaro into Moshi. Some are smuggled into the DRC, Burundi and Malawi. It’s reported that Tanzanian syndicates work with their counterparts in South Africa, Botswana, Mozambique and Kenya.

There are widely reported cases involving insured vehicles driven from South Africa to syndicates in neighbouring countries. The buyers are reportedly given time to process particulars of the new vehicle before a report of hijacking or theft is made to the police. Owners of such vehicles subsequently claim for losses from insurers.

Clearly, this is a sophisticated racket using what could appear as a legitimate business. Police alone cannot be expected to win this battle. 

The SAPS reported recently that these syndicates exploit differential taxes of highly-taxed goods such as cigarettes, alcohol and petroleum. They sometimes choose not to declare their goods, bribe officials or transport their goods through illegal routes.

Fraud

The syndicates are also involved in fraudulent transactions involving under-declarations of imported goods. They are known to double-invoice for the purpose of using undervalued invoices for declarations.

The premier has called on the business community to join the fight against cross-border crime because it is often the target of criminals. Also, jewellery shops especially in Durban shopping malls, electronic shops and homes are often targets of robberies by these syndicates. There are reports that jewellery is being moved from South Africa into SADC and other countries. This jewellery is either redesigned and brought back to South Africa or moved to other markets.

Our fight to ensure quality health care for all is compromised by the smuggling of counterfeit medicines through our borders. This is one of the biggest threats facing SADC and Africa.

Syndicates are supplying pharmaceutical companies including government institutions with counterfeit, expired and non-regulated drugs. They run unregistered clinics and pharmacies and are also involved in exports and imports. Access to quality health care and essential medicines is needed to reduce disease and death and enhance quality of life. Medicines are only beneficial when they are safe, of high quality, and properly distributed by qualified health professionals. 

Although the South Africa government and many others in the SADC have made certain drugs available free of charge, these are stolen and sold at exorbitant prices on the open market or in neighbouring coun­tries with different pricing policies. According to the Word Health Organisation, about $ 4.1trillion is spent globally on health services every year, with $750billion spent in the pharmaceutical market. Between 10% and 25% of public procurement spending (including on pharmaceuticals) is lost to corrupt practices. In developed countries, fraud and abuse in health care has been estimated to cost individual governments as much as $23bn per year. The WHO says countries with a higher incidence of corruption have higher child mortality rates.

Criminals have also flooded major cities across the SADC with fake cosmetics disguised as popular brands, including skin-care products, nail polish, make-up and hair products. The entertainment sector has also been severely affected by counterfeit and cross-border crime. Pirated DVDs and CDs are sold in most cities in Africa by street vendors and small shop owners. There is a highly organised syndicate which is involved in this racket. It is estimated that 6% of livestock stolen in KZN cross borders into neighbouring countries. The provincial government is pleased with the support from the Department of International Relations and Co-operation which ensures co-operation between law-enforcement agencies of neighbouring countries.



* Sibiya is spokesperson for the premier.
** The views expressed here are not necessarily those of Independent Media.
The Mercury