Durban - Parliament's ad hoc committee investigating
maladministration at the SABC is an example of black people wanting to reverse
the empowerment of other blacks, axed SABC COO Hlaudi Motsoeneng said on
Friday.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads


“These people are saying they represent ordinary black
citizens of the country. They come with their own ad hoc committee and put in
an ad hoc committee to investigate SABC," he told an African National
Congress Youth League eThekwini region "economic freedom" lecture on
Friday night.

“Now, you are black, you want to reverse empowerment of
black people. I am not afraid of these people who are making noise. And
actually if you look, why did [the ad hoc committee] not call Hlaudi to come
[answer questions]? From day one it was Hlaudi until the end. But they refused
to call Hlaudi,” he said.

Motsoeneng is a regular speaker at events of the
provincial youth league and its branches and is a crowd favourite. His address
was met with whoops and cheers from the audience. He told the crowd that
Members of Parliament needed to "operate within the Constitution".

If he had killed someone he would be allowed to defend
himself. “In this case I did not kill anyone. I empowered black people. But you
know why they did not call me? They did not call me because they knew that when
I took that stand people of South Africa they are going to believe in me
because they believe in me. And actually the majority of South Africans support
what we have been doing at the SABC,” said Motsoeneng.

He had implemented policy that brought about
transformation and brought about empowerment, unlike other leaders who did not
realise that a policy was not delivery.

“In South Africa we have so many policies but we have the
wrong people implementing them,” he said.

Motsoeneng was one of the key reasons a parliamentary
inquiry into the SABC board was instituted. Parliament on Tuesday adopted the
committee's report.

Among other things, the report referred Communications
Minister Faith Muthambi to Parliament’s ethics committee to probe her
involvement in the amendment of the board’s memorandum of incorporation as well
as her role in the controversial appointment of Motsoeneng as SABC COO in 2014.

The report also asked President Jacob Zuma to reconsider
Muthambi's appointment as minister. Muthambi has indicated she will take the
findings on judicial review.

AFRICAN NEWS
AGENCY