Washington - Apple announced several new productson Tuesday
morning, including a cheaper version of the iPad and a new red shade for the
iPhone. Consumers can place their orders for the new devices starting Friday.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads


If you've been thinking about treating yourself to
something new and are intrigued by Apple's announcements, here are some things
to consider before you buy.

The strongest selling point for the new 9.7-inch iPad is
its price. The tablet now starts at $329, which is $70 less than its previous
price. It has a retina display and comes in three colours: gold, silver and
space gray.

The new iPad appears to be a replacement for the iPad Air
2, so it's best to think of it as a successor to that product - an in-between,
easy-to-carry tablet for watching video and Web browsing. It is about 20 percent
thicker than its predecessor but is still pretty trim at 1.03 pounds.

The lower price tag comes with a few tradeoffs, however.
It doesn't have Apple's latest processor but packs the same one from the iPhone
6S and 6S Plus, meaning that it is a little slower than the latest iPhone. The
new tablet also has no support for the Apple Pencil or Apple's Smart Keyboard -
those appear to still be reserved for the iPad Pro line.
Read also: Who wants multiple iPhone personalities?

That will probably be fine for most people. If you're
looking for a full laptop replacement, however, it's probably not your best
option.

Apple also upped the storage space on the iPad mini to
128 GB, for $399, which could make the smaller tablet more appealing as a
travel companion for watching video - if you don't mind the price. The smaller
size makes it a little more plane-friendly than a full-size tablet.

As for the new red iPhone, deciding whether to pay $749
for it is almost entirely a cosmetic decision. The anodized red hue is a
head-turner and benefits the AIDS awareness campaign Red. Apple has already put
a similar colour on its iPods, but this is the first time it has come to the
iPhone.

If you're really digging the colour or if you are an AIDS
research supporter, those are the reasons to buy. There's no difference in the
actual hardware, so you won't be upgrading anything apart from your style.

 WASHINGTON POST