DURBAN - The construction of the new temporary premises intended to house Durban beachfront watersports clubs currently based at Vetch’s Beach should be complete by mid-month. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
That was the word from chairman of the Point Watersports Club (PWC), Cuane Hall, this week. The construction is one of the first steps in the Point Waterfront Development which will see the beach promenade being extended to the harbour. 
The clubs were advised by the developers that they would have to vacate their existing premises by August 8, but this has been put on hold until the temporary facility is ready.
Speaking about the Point Waterfront Development  project, Hall said: “This is going to be a landmark development for Durban and is estimated to create around 11 500 jobs in this area.”
The new temporary facility looks out over the harbour entrance and is next to the sand pumping station at the North Pier. There have been plans for permanent premises for the watersport clubs under the new promenade as part of the development.
But the move of the four clubs – the Durban Undersea Club, Durban Ski Boat Club, Point Yacht Club and Durban Paddle Ski Club – to make way for the waterfront development has been dogged by controversy, infighting and lengthy legal battles.
On Friday, the new commodore of the Point Yacht Club, Greg de Beyer, confirmed that the former commodore, Craig Millar, and PYC honorary life president Dave Cuthbert had been mandated to represent the PYC in all on-going negotiations. 
“All we are looking for is a transparent, participative discussion. We want to be part of and understand what is going on. We don’t want to stop progress or stop change, but we would like to do it together and be involved,” said De Beyer. 
The interior fittings at the Point Yacht Club were removed early in the week, which created outrage among members who rallied to replace everything ahead of the weekend. 
“Yes, the Point Yacht Club has been stripped, which is contrary to legal agreement with the Durban Undersea Club. But members have spent the week restoring the club back into working condition and one member is even driving from Johannesburg on Saturday bringing furniture. We will be open this weekend and food and soft drinks will be available,” said De Beyer.
eThekwini Municipality’s head of communications, Tozi Mthethwa, said “the city is currently in engagements with all the concerned stakeholders, and the dates of the commencement of the construction have not yet been finalised”.
Follow the IOS on Twitter
Follow the IOS on Facebook

 INDEPENDENT ON SATURDAY