The Durban-based Centre for Rehabilitation of Wildlife (CROW) is currently rehabilitating several baby animals.The group shared updates on their young charges in their latest newsletter. One of the latest admissions is Drogo, a three-month old Chacma Baboon (Papio ursinus) from Bushman’s Neck. Drogo ended up in the care of the organisation after losing his mom due to human interference. Drogo’s favourite time of the day is play time with his new older sister, Khaleesi. Although he really loves his bottle, he insists on putting up a playful challenge before guzzling down his daily feeds.Albert, a Spotted Eagle Owl (Bubo Africanus) weeks away from being a fledgling, was admitted after falling from his nest. Over the past few weeks, Albert has come along in leaps and bounds and has just been transferred to a specialised enclosure where he will be able to begin stretching his wings, ready to take flight.CROW clinic nurse Sue-Ann Shutte also has her hands full with four baby genets. The energetic youngsters, who are all Large Spotted Genets (Genetta tigrine) between the ages of one to three weeks old, have found their way to the centre after being rescued from different locations around Durban. All four babies are currently getting round the clock care from Sue, their surrogate mother who has the full-time job of juggling two-hourly bottle feeds for her little litter. Despite the obvious sleep deprivation that comes with such a demanding job, Sue maintains that the long hours coupled with the lack of sleep will all be worth it once these youngsters have gained the strength and independence needed to fend for themselves in the wild. All four genets currently in Sue’s care will be released once they are able to find food and defend themselves in their natural habitat.


Sergeant, a Grey Duiker (Sylvicapra Grimmia) and under a week old, joined the CROW family after he was separated from his mother. Weighing in at a mere 1.18 kilograms when he was admitted, the team is proud to report that young Sergeant is now at a much healthier weight thanks to the around-the-clock treatment from CROW’s clinic team.Mr Small, one of the smallest Vervet Monkeys (Chlorocebus Pygerythrus) currently in CROW’s care, lost his mother after she accidentally got knocked by a car. The heartbroken family stopped to help the mom, and noticed that she had a baby with her. Without hesitation, Mr Small was quickly rushed to the organisation’s clinic.This young Thrush (Turdidae), ended up at the organisation after he fell into a pool from his nest. Being a branchling, it is very easy for strong winds to displace young birds. After being observed for a couple of days by the clinic team, the Thrush is being prepared for release.If you would like to help the CROW team care for these and other spring orphans, you can contact them directly on 031 462 1127 or at info@crowkzn.co.za, or visit their website. The Mercury