New Durban Chamber of Commerce and industry (DCCI) president, Musa Makhunga describes himself as an entrepreneur who is committed to ethical business practices and ensuring that local business leaders and government work together to stimulate the city’s economy.Makhunga was inaugurated as the chamber’s president at its glittering 161st annual gala dinner in the city last night. He is the founding managing director of HR Matters (Pty) Ltd, a local strategic HR leadership specialist firm. He is also a trained teacher who worked in many industries including education, manufacturing, mining, retail, banking and consulting over the past 30 years. The chamber launched its first “Durban Business Code of Ethics” last night and embraced the vision “In Business for a Better World” and “Profit with Conscience”.Makhunga said he was passionate about seeing local businesses not only exist to generate profit, but to serve a meaningful purpose in operating ethically and giving back to society. He said he aimed to promote the chamber’s vision to advocate for, and serve the interests of, business by working closely with stakeholders, including policy makers at local, provincial and national levels to find solutions to problems facing the local economy.“Our vision is that we should really get the business community to realise that we should be in business for a better world. Profit with conscience is really nothing new, it’s King one to four (the King Code of Governance) and says, if we are in business, we should not just be looking at the bottom line, there are other bottom lines we should be aware of, not only of the impact of our operations and processes on society but also we should be aware of where we could make a difference,” Mukhunga said.He said the chamber would focus members on its new code of ethics which customers and society as a whole could expect them to uphold, apart from their own existing ethical codes. The code covers eight overarching principles, underpinned by the concepts of integrity, accountability and leadership, and covers business dealings with the government and legislation, to employees, competitors, customers, suppliers and the environment.“We hope we will be able to engage members, have dialogue and converse and keep pricking their conscience around this,” Mukhunga said.The chamber’s chief executive officer, Dumile Cele, said the organisation would continue to refine the code of ethics in collaboration with members. A peer review committee would likely be set up to hold members accountable before referring any complaints to external platforms, such as the various ombudsman schemes for resolution, she said.Cele said she was grateful to Makhunga, whose constructive leadership skills proved inspirational within the chamber. She said she was looking forward to seeing more targeted channels for businesses to contribute collectively to serving society. “Musa is committed to building the capacity of the chamber because we have a big vision, but we can’t achieve it if we don’t have capacity,” Cele said.“The heartfelt message he drives is profit with conscience, business for a better world and how do we get business involved in sorting out broader social ills. We can’t be islands among a sea of poverty because it will eventually close in on us,” she said.