A GROUP of Durban friends with an aversion to sugar and a love for quality chocolates that could not be satisfied with options on the market decided to learn the craft of chocolate making –and stumbled upon a niche business opportunity.Before long their unconventional hobby, which had them churning out delicious diabetic-friendly Belgian chocolates to enjoy at home and sell on a small scale to raise funds for their church, spiralled into a business.Chocolatiers Julienne Prozesky and Alex Roberts, co-founders of Rhubee’s in Kloof, which they started six years ago together with four friends, were already business partners in Celtico, a clothing design house which supplies national retail chain. So it wasn’t too difficult to start up a second small business when it became evident that they had hit a sweet spot.“We believe sugar is quite a bad thing and there is horrible press about it being bad for your health, so if we can’t eat sugar what are we going to do for treats? There was nothing on the market. We bought a tiny block of chocolate and made treats for friends and family a couple of times a week, and gradually grew it into a business,” Roberts said.“As people became more conscious of their health we were anticipating that it would probably grow, but we didn’t know where it was going and suddenly it was quite a big enterprise,” Roberts said.Prozesky said the friends had wanted to raise funds and had agreed that they had not found a chocolate bar on the market that did not contain added sugar, and which also had a great taste and a creamy texture. However, their initial “hobby” product was not chocolate but another kind of confectionary – marshmallows made from egg whites.“We wanted something that we could start without putting money in, so we started making square marshmallows with coconut on and we used the yolk of the egg to make mayonnaise,” Prozesky said.“We bought a bit of chocolate and covered the marshmallows with chocolate and then we bought 500g of chocolate and decided to make little chocolates to sell. Of course it was a lot of work, so we decided to make chocolate bars,” she said.Prozesky said a friendly local chocolatier and bulk Belgian chocolate supplier taught them the craft of chocolate-making and tempering after they hit a common production problem: chocolate bloom – a whitish tint that sometimes appears on the surface of chocolate because of changes in fat content or the action of moisture on chocolate.“In the beginning we didn’t even know how to temper chocolate. He showed us how to temper by hand on a slab of granite. Chocolate is very temperamental and what happens with the tempering is that all the chocolate crystals align themselves in the same direction and the chocolate is snappy and creamy, otherwise it is crumbly and there is a grey tint. It was all trial and error,” she said.Rhubee’s chocolates are made from the finest Belgian couverture chocolate, sweetened with maltitol, and contain natural additives such as peppermint oils, handmade Turkish delight, coconut ice, hazelnut praline and nuts. Fillings are sweetened with the low-calorie sugar alcohol, xylitol.Prozesky and Roberts went on a professional chocolate-making course at a chocolate factory in Belgium two years ago and they haven’t looked back. The popularity of their chocolates soared and, before long, they started supplying not only chocolates but also raw cacao, cocoa nibs, chocolate chips and cocoa powder to several local Manoli’s stores and Spar supermarkets, before expanding to several delis and a health shop in Johannesburg. Today the business employs three staff who run the small factory, but the group of friends still pitches in every Thursday and Sunday to help with production and packaging.“We have a very nice product and we still eat it after all these years. We just want to expand now,” Prozesky said. Roberts said the business was moving into bigger premises later this year, with plans to set up the factory in a 400m2 space down the line and to supply stores nationally before considering export opportunities. The business won the Best Newcomer award at the Good Food and Wine Show in Durban last year.