The estimated R1.6 billion Cornubia Mall near uMhlanga will be almost fully occupied when it officially opens its doors later this month.  Darryl Mayer, head of Investec Property SA, which developed the 65 000m² retail mall situated within easy access from the N2 highway, the M41 and Cornubia Boulevard, said the shopping centre would open on September 28 with an almost full tenancy rate.         “We will be between 96 and 98% let at opening and the remainder will probably fill up by December,” Mayer said.The mall offers a selection of food, fashion, lifestyle and sports attractions integrated into an outdoor family-oriented shopping experience. Among the 230 stores opening in the first phase of the development are a 2 000m² Dis-Chem, Pick n Pay, Checkers, Woolworths, Outdoor Warehouse, Thule Lifestyle Centre, Baby Boom, Edgars, Ackermans, Truworths, Mr Price Sport, Sportscene, a Virgin Active gym, John Dory’s, Spur, McDonald’s, KFC, Nino’s, Jayshree’s Rivaz as well as jewellery stores, cellphone stores, pet stores, banks and other retailers. The mall is connected by bridges, landscaped walkways and pavements to give shoppers a sense of being indoors and outdoors at the same time, making the most of the province’s favourable weather conditions.                           Cornubia Mall will also introduce a series of innovations for the fit and energetic offered for the first time at a retail mall in the province, including a 70km mountain bike trail which starts and ends at the mall and meanders through the surrounding greater Cornubia green belt, a bounce trampoline park and a Fives Futbol facility which offers three outdoor five-a-side soccer pitches.  A 2 000m² Cycle Lab megastore, a Consol Glass boutique store and a seven-screen Nu Metro cinema complex with specialised 4DX, Xtreme and luxurious VIP theatres as well as regular 3D/2D cinemas, a VIP lounge, in-cinema dining menu, a licensed bar and gourmet Poptopia kiosk are also among the firsts for the mall.                                                       Mayer said the team had managed to overcome the challenge of experiencing one of the wettest years Durban has seen over the past 20 years to complete the entire 146 000m² development on schedule within 20 months.  He said the mall had brought infrastructure, jobs and skills transfer as well as closer retail stores and improved transport to residents within the Cornubia development and surrounding communities. He estimated that the mall would create about 1 100 permanent jobs, while at least 2 500 temporary jobs had been created during construction.      An artist’s impression of an open air section of the new Cornubia mall which is to launch at the end of the month.Mayer said the developer had put measures in place to ensure the local community would be accommodated when it came to job opportunities to avoid the protests similar retail developments had attracted upon opening in recent years. He said the developer had engaged in constant interaction, including weekly planning meetings with the local councillor and his team, which had worked closely with the mall.                                                                                                    “The local community has been given preference. We have also invested in skills training and job readiness within the community. We will work very closely with the community to assist with needs within their communities with a focus on education, entrepreneurship and infrastructure initiatives through the Cornubia Mall Trust which will be launched soon,” Mayer said.                                                              He added that the developer had left room for further growth of the development and there was already a plan for a 20 000m² expansion in the future. The second phase would include a further 70 stores that would be added to the mall.