The eThekwini municipality has taken the owners of popular leisure spot Giba Gorge – along with the company that manages Giba Gorge and 26 tenants – to the Durban High Court in a bid to have a judge order “unauthorised” structures there torn down.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

It says warehouses, office blocks, mini factories, storage units and a tuck shop were all erected without its approval and on a floodplain.

The owners of the properties, Natal Board of Property Administrators, are challenging the authority of the municipality's attorney to represent it and requested various documents that – they say – are needed before they can file an affidavit.

But the company's Chris Harburn told The Mercury they were taking the case “very seriously”.

“We are getting our legal team at Macgregor Erasmus to handle it through the correct channels. Unfortunately it is a very complex issue and we don't want to jeopardise our case in any way by commenting further. We are optimistic everything will be sorted out in due course,” Harburn said.

In her founding affidavit, a legal adviser for the municipality, Samantha Mahadeo, said the structures in question came to the attention of the authorities in 2012.

Mahadeo said the properties on which Giba Gorge was located, bordered on – but were outside – the Outer West Scheme.

In July 2012, she said, the company managing Giba Gorge – Turnstone Trading 6 – applied for the scheme to be extended over the area, to create a new zone and to re-zone Giba Gorge. 

She said the municipality conducted a site inspection and it was then established that no-one had applied for approval for the erection of any of the buildings on the properties.

Mahadeo said an application in this regard submitted afterwards, was refused for various reasons.

She said that in 2015 the municipality did approve the application for the scheme to be extended over Giba Gorge, to create a new zone and to re-zone Giba Gorge.

But, she said, this was on various conditions including that:
* Structures located within the flood line of the Mhlatuzana River, were removed and relocated;
* Building plans were submitted 
* A site development plan was submitted and approved.

Mahadeo said these conditions were not adhered to.

“The existence of these buildings within the floodplain cannot be legalised since the (municipality) cannot and will not relax the floodline, and so they must be removed to comply with the scheme,” she said.

And she said the development plan could not be legalised without “as-is” plans being submitted.

Mahadeo said there were various environmental issues. She said tenants had encroached on the conservation zone on the property, destroying natural vegetation and leaving an area of bare soil which would – in time – lead to soil erosion.

“The existence and usage of (the) buildings is unlawful and an offence and there has been no control or regulation over the buildings, from health or safety aspects, or the discharge of things like waste, for the preservation and protection of the surrounding environment,” she said.

She also said there was the potential of an accident or “incident,” which would leave the municipality exposed to a damages claim and environmental damage.

The matter came before the court last week and was adjourned indefinitely, with the municipality expected to arrange a date to apply for and argue interim relief, pending the finalisation of the matter.