South Africa’s obesity problem seems to be growing, putting many at risk for other serious health problems, says one researcher.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Public Health expert Dr Kufre Okop found through his research that excess body weight, or a body mass index, or BMI, of more than 25 had in studies been linked to 87% of cases of type 2 diabetes; 38% of heart disease; and 45% of strokes in the country. 
“What’s more, the prevalence of overweight and obesity has risen sharply in South Africa – a disconcerting spike from 56% to 65% between 2002 and 2012,” said Okop in a statement.
He said, as elsewhere in the world, there were noticeable gender and ethnic differences among South Africa’s overweight and obese. 
“Data from 2013 shows that women are more likely than men to be overweight and obese.”
Okop pointed out that more than two-thirds of women in the country were overweight or obese, compared to about a third of the men.
“The prevalence of overweight and obesity was also shown to be significantly higher in females aged 15 to 74 years (25% and 40.1%, respectively) than in males (19.6% and 11.6%, respectively).”
Of interest to Okop were findings that pointed to ethnic differences among South Africa’s overweight and obese population. 
“One such study showed that South African black female students were more likely to be overweight or obese than their white counterparts. The situation applied to men as well – even higher proportions of black men (49.3%) and black women (74.6%) were overweight or obese than the men (45.7%) and women (66%) of mixed ancestry (ie coloureds) and white women (42.2%).”
These numbers, he said, spelt trouble for individuals. 
“Increased body weight is associated with cardiovascular disease (CVD) like hypertension (commonly known as high blood pressure), ischaemic stroke and ischaemic heart disease (ischaemic refers to blood flow to organs and tissue), as well as type 2 diabetes among South Africans aged 15 years and older.”
Notably, he said, cardiovascular disease was now recognised as the second largest cause of death in South Africa after HIV/AIDS/TB, rising from about 13.2% in 1997 to 17.8% in 2010.
The Mercury