MY LATE father once said: “Fools rush in where wise men never go.” What is the role of the media ahead of the ANC 2017 elective conference? The month of September is especially crucial for the ANC, as the party in charge of the state. The nomination processes for the new leadership to take the country forward have started in earnest. Like in the build-up to the previous conferences, all ANC members are at liberty to influence each other and must remain open for themselves to be influenced by others on the leadership choices. Neither side can be seen as wrong for supporting any leader of the ANC for election – be it in private or in public.  This is the message that I believe should be reiterated to avoid public spats, mudslinging and name-calling. Critically, having worked with the media over the past years, I strongly believe that there must, however, be a different expectation of how the media conducts itself in internal matters of the ANC.It is my fervent belief that nothing stops anybody in the media fraternity from commenting on, criticising or even expressing support for any leader of the ANC ahead of the national conference. Since 2007, many media houses have moved a little further from sampling the internal debates and leadership preferences, to desperate attempts to influence conference outcomes. Without appearing to be lecturing my colleagues in the media, the reliance on unnamed internal ANC sources who themselves have personal interests, is damaging images of reputable media brands. When scanning Facebook pages of senior and junior journalists you get amazed to see them rooting for certain leaders. Some are even involved in cyberbullying as part of efforts to strengthen their support for certain leaders who are campaigning. Some chief lobbyists and campaigners clearly have influence over the journalists or individuals in the media.  For someone who peruses the newspapers, it raises concerns that clear lobby lines are appearing unadulterated in media columns and reports that should be respected for their objectivity.  It is worse on Facebook pages of some journalists. They are too entangled. The level of attachments of some journalists to ANC leaders, internal processes and party dynamics has gone too deep for an institution that needs to exercise professional and unbiased evaluation of facts and fiction around a political organisation or leaders. In the build-up to Polokwane and Mangaung conferences, many in the media were unwittingly used by individuals who fed to the newsrooms’ gossip, lies and rumours.  Whether journalists like or dislike a certain leader, ANC members as card-carrying members delegated by their branches have a supreme right and freedom to choose their leaders. It is a fact that whether political leaders admit it or not, if they are criticised in the media, deep down, they know if the criticism is founded on facts or not.  It is also important for the media to do an unbiased scrutiny of the conduct of political party leaders and be outspoken about it. In the build-up to Polokwane and Mangaung conferences, many in the media were unwittingly used by individuals who fed to the newsrooms’ gossip, lies and rumours.  Some journalists and columnists even published one-sided views of the goings-on inside the ANC as gospel truth, only to be shocked and others traumatised by both the outcome and the fact that they got it all so wrong.If journalists are not careful and allow themselves to be too attached to certain leaders of the ANC, they will be shocked, disappointed and traumatised on December 18.  The level of pessimism will engulf newsrooms with journalists failing to even find a positive side of the outcomes of the 2017 ANC elective conference. Journalists, please be very careful about the path you take from now until December 18. I wish all ANC leaders all the best. I know they will desist from mudslinging, name-calling and character assassination. I trust that ANC leaders will inspire us with messages of hope for a better future.  I remain hopeful about the future of this country and will always cherish the opportunity to have worked and interacted with many leaders of this glorious movement.  As they go about with their campaigns, our leaders must remember that they have a responsibility to hand over to us and future generations a solid ANC, strong enough to drive radical economic transformation. The new leadership has an important role to guide the youth of today who are the generation born to defend the gains of our democracy. With proper guidance and exemplary leadership to draw strength from, the youth of today will know how to use the political freedom to liberate millions of our people from economic oppression. It is the young people of this country who finally brought down the apartheid machinery with Nelson Mandela voting for the first time for a democratic government on April 27, 1994. Critically, the new ANC leadership will be elected in the same month that marks the sad passing away of Mandela, a former leader of the ANC Youth League.   It is this leadership that will plan and preside over the centenary commemoration of Madiba who would have turned 100 in 2018.   We know that Tata Madiba was freed by the blood of young people of this country who made it impossible for the apartheid regime to operate. ** Sibiya is spokesperson for KZN Premier Willies Mchunu and writes in his personal capacity.