DURBAN - Farmers who suffered losses due to the recent drought feel let down by the KwaZulu-Natal provincial government after reports that approximately  R200-million allocated for the relief fund was squandered while their cattle perished.
The most drought-stricken regions were uMkhanyakude, uThungulu, iLembe, Zululand, uMgungundlovu, Harry Gwala, uMzinyathi and uThukela. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The initial allocation of R352.4m was channelled to municipalities after several regions were declared disaster areas.  

Most small-scale and subsistence farmers in the northern part of the province were still reeling from the huge loss of livestock. 

They had hoped the provincial Department of Agriculture would rescue them, until MEC Themba Mthembu announced last week that the funds had been misused.

The money was supposed to have been used for the delivery of water tankers, drilling of boreholes and fodder.

The department appointed an independent company to conduct a forensic investigation into the futile expenditure.

A subsistence farmer from Babanango, outside Ulundi, Thokozani Ndawo, said their informal trust consisting of eight families lost more than 1500 cattle while waiting for the relief from the department. Ndawo himself lost close to 100 cows and is now left with only 15. 

“It was an empty promise,” he lamented.

Ndawo was unemployed and his only source of income was selling his cattle to support his family and pay for his children’s higher education. 

A struggling widow Basolile Mncube, from Nquthu, said the drought had worsened the poverty in her village. 

Mncube lives with her five children and they survived solely through trading in livestock like most families in the village. The drought left many of them with empty kraals. 

“It was very disturbing to learn that relief funds were distributed but never reached the people who needed the help. I wish the ministers could visit poor communities to understand our plight,” said Mncube.

Nongoma mayor Albert Mncwango said some of the cattle feed sent to the region arrived late and there was not enough to reach all the affected farmers.

Thubelihle Zondi, chairperson of the African Farmers Association, said they were not shocked by the corruption allegations as they had received numerous complaints from farmers in all regions about the drought relief not reaching them and the local Department of Agriculture officials not being able to give them answers. 

“Only those who are close to the city benefited from the fund while the farmers who were most affected suffered in rural areas such as Zululand and Umkhanyakude in the far north. 

“We have been pleading with the department to work closely with us so we can also account on the use of funds. We are closer to the farmers but the department is not willing to work with us as independent bodies,” he said. 

Zondi said they support Mthembu’s efforts to root out the corruption engulfing the department and they were planning to march to the department’s offices to demand that those implicated be held accountable.

“We appreciate the probe into the allegation of corruption, but this could have been prevented if there were more consultation between the stakeholders,” said Noah Nyawo of Youth in Agriculture.

No one had been charged at the time of publication but Mthembu’s spokesperson Khaye Nkwanyana said the MEC was hoping to get to the bottom of the matter to ensure all those who are implicated are charged and prosecuted. 

He would not disclose when the internal investigation would be completed.  

 siboniso.mgandi@inl.co.za
SUNDAY TRIBUNE