Your first time in a gym can be an overwhelming experience, having to learn how to use the machines and getting used to the hordes of other gym-goers around you.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
At this time of the year, gyms often see their numbers of members soaring, as many sign up in a frantic bid to get their bodies in shape for the summer.
But Ignite Fitness personal trainer Samuel Borsah warns gym newbies not to just walk into the gym and engage in exercise without professionals’ advice.
“It is important to complete a gym assessment. The assessment includes medical check, fitness level, blood pressure and a skin fold check,” he cautions.
“It would be a pity for someone to die at the gym just because a trainer made them do intense exercise that might push their heart rate too hard if one has a heart condition,” says Borsah.
Before picking gym equipment to use, he suggests getting to know your body and what your exercise goals are to decide on which equipment to use.
Ian Pienaar, commercial product manager at Virgin Active South Africa, says the biggest mistake that first-time gym members make is not asking for help at clubs.
He suggests that newbies should use fitness instructors,  start their exercise routine slowly and do what is comfortable for them.
“You should never push yourself too hard on your first day. You should progressively build up the intensity.”
Pienaar says adults should look at a moderate training session of 30-60 minutes, five times per week or 20-60 minutes of vigorous exercise three times per week.
People who want to lose weight should do at least 150 minutes of moderate to high-intensity exercise per week. A workout should consist of a combination of resistance and cardiovascular training.


For people who want to build muscle, he advises that they  should start by learning how to do the fundamental exercises correctly. 
“Once you understand how to do those, you can start to increase your load and decrease the number of repetitions to between 12-8 reps per set,” suggests  Pienaar.
“Training with a partner that has the same goals will help to stay motivated, especially on the days you don’t feel like training. Training with a partner also helps to keep the  sessions fun,” adds Pienaar.
Borsah says there are few basic gym etiquette rules to keep from looking and feeling like a jerk, such as personal hygiene, what to wear and how to treat people.
“Fungal infections of the skin can be common at the gym. Wash your hands frequently before and after your workout session.”
 Borsah adds people need to be mindful of their sweat on gym equipment.
“You may not be in control of how much you sweat because that is obviously why you are there. 
“However, you can be mindful of leaving your sweat on the cycling chair when you can wipe it with your gym towel when you stand up.”

The gym is not a fashion runway and  Borsah says people should dress appropriately for it.
“We have seen people running on a treadmill with leggings or jeans and I often think that might be very uncomfortable for them. So I wouldn’t advise people to do it.”
Lastly, be kind to other people. “We have our own reasons for going to the gym. For some, it’s weight gain, others toning and for some it’s losing weight. 
“Don’t laugh, mock or take photos of people who may be going there to lose weight. They are in the right place. It takes bravery to make a choice to be fit.”
The Mercury