Up to 15 000 people are expected to join the Durban-leg of the national planned strike action on Wednesday.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
In the city, the action is expected to start at King Dinuzulu (Botha’s) Park and end at the City Hall, where a memorandum will be handed over.
The planned national shutdown by the labour federation comes following revelations made by the former Public Protector about the scourge of corruption and the capture of key state institutions.
READ: Cosatu will strike nationally over state capture
Metro Police Senior Superintendent Parboo Sewpersad told The Mercury that 1 500 marshals – together with the city’s CCTV cameras – would be monitoring the situation.
“We are expecting the action to begin at 10am and finish by 1pm. While there will be one lane open on Dr Dr Pixley KaSeme Street (formerly West Street) for emergency vehicles, we urge people to use alternative routes and avoid the area.”
Sewpersad said the streets that intersected with the one being used should also be kept away from.
He said that Metro Police officers would not be joining the action because they were classified as emergency workers.
Meanwhile, Cosatu president Sdumo Dlamini would be leading the KwaZulu-Natal leg of the strike.
READ: Numsa views Cosatu’s planned strike as an 'act of desperation'
“We are striking against corruption in the private and public sector and any individual supposedly guilty of corruption will be targeted,” said Dlamini.
Cosatu provincial secretary Edwin Mkhize said affiliates in various sectors would join the strike with the intention to fight economic, political ills facing workers.
“The capturing of the state is wide concept done by individuals and groups to loot state resources. This is done for the benefaction of a selected few.
“If state capture becomes a norm, companies will continue to retrench workers. Individual capturing of state owned entities is also increasing and is a real threat to the principle of a collective economy,” Mkhize.
More in The Mercury on Wednesday
The Mercury