A broken scanner and intermittent system breakdown have slowed service delivery at the Pinetown Home Affairs office. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
These were among the problems revealed during an unannounced visit by Home Affairs Minister Professor Hlengiwe Mkhize on Tuesday.
Office manager Ronny Perumal said the scanner had not been working for 14 weeks, which meant they could not issue IDs and children’s passports.
Mkhize said: “You are sitting with a crisis here.” 
Perumal agreed and said people who came for their first IDs and children’s passports were referred to the department’s office on Dr AB Xuma Street (Commercial Road) which is bigger and has more machines. 
But going to Commercial Road had made no difference to Elsie Sieg, who approached the minister saying she had been trying for three months to get her daughter Natalie an ID. 
“We stand in the queue from 5am. When we came here some time ago we were told the scanners were not working and we should go to town. 
“In town they were offline and we were told to go to Chatsworth. We’ve just come from Chatsworth now and they’re offline. We’re running backwards and forwards and it’s costing us a lot of money. My daughter will lose her job if she doesn’t get her ID.” 
When questioned about this, Perumal said he did not understand why they were sent to Chatsworth – which he also manages – as that office did not issue smart cards. 
Besides the scanners, Perumal said the system was often down due to GoDurban construction which started two years ago. 
Speaking to Perumal, Mkhize said officials should show compassion and attempt to make up for inconveniences suffered.
“I would strongly recommend that when a person has been here, if they have to go to another office, proper arrangements be made so that they don’t join the queues again. 
“That will send a strong message of caring. To say it’s a scanner that is broken is neither here nor there. More than technology… it’s how they experience our service.”
Mkhize also spoke with Beatrice Ndlovu, 75, whose pension was cut off because her ID was so old and tattered that it could not be scanned. 
The minister had her matter fast-tracked as she sat shivering due to old age. 
Mkhize said her visit was part of Public Service Month when they visit their offices to find out how public servants are “caring for our people”.
“Our documents are critical throughout the lifespan of people, whether they have to write exams at school, access grants or jobs, it goes back to them having a smart card or an ID.”
After talking to the manager and staff, she said there were problems, mainly related to infrastructure. 
“Generally, I think the workers create a healthy atmosphere, they are warm towards people which is the most important thing; it’s within all of us to be humane in providing a service.”
Regarding the area around the Pinetown office becoming a hot spot for crime, Mkhize said she would raise this with Perumal. “If there is a problem which can be tackled decisively, effectively and timeously by another department, we have no reason not to call on the local police station to monitor and even intelligence, to look at trends and be clear about what is going on so crime can be stopped.”
The Mercury