If we want to affect real change in South Africa, it’s time to find new, more radical ways of expressing our dissatisfaction, writes Justin Foxton.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
As I write this I am watching a TV screen that is flashing up the plummeting value of our post-junk-status rand. I pick up my phone and the anti-Zuma rants pour in on social media; anger spews forth.
An e-mail comes from a pastor friend inviting us to “pray up, speak up, stand up, march up, and shout from the rooftops, against the firing of Gordhan and his deputy, against Zuma’s shameless blatant ‘treasury capture’; to further pillage and rape the nation’s resources for his own ends of security and power”.
My wife sends me news of a local march we can join. We march, we pray and we speak out as many South Africans have. But is it just me, or does this response seem so inadequate, so uncreative, given the scale of the evil against which we are protesting? Are these actions our only answer to a president who is committing such wilful acts of violence against our people? I ask this as a person who fully believes in the power of prayer and protest.
Violence? Yes, I use that word deliberately. I believe this is where we have gone horribly wrong in our assessment of Jacob Zuma and hence how we deal with him. Jacob Zuma is not just a corrupt man. Jacob Zuma is a violent man. A Sanskrit definition that proves this point. A non-violent person would demonstrate “a lack of desire to harm or kill; the personal practice of being harmless to self and others under every condition”.



By this definition, our president is a violent man, out to harm people through stealing from them; systematically destroying our currency and hence the value of people’s savings, pensions and grants. He is killing our economy, squeezing every drop of life out of it for himself and his cronies.
How do we respond to such self-centred, power-drunk violence? We march, we pray and speak out. And all the while our poor are getting poorer, hungrier and sicker.
People will undoubtedly die because of Zuma’s acts of violence. They will starve to death because their grants will no longer afford them the necessities they need to survive as junk status rips our economy to shreds. They will be unable to afford transport to clinics to get life-saving medication.
Please let us stop reducing Jacob Zuma to such relative niceties as a buffoon with a shower rose on his head. Jacob Zuma is a violent despot who must be made to answer a litany of charges, including why he wilfully and knowingly brought yet more poverty and starvation to the poorest of the poor in our country by knowingly and calculatingly taking us into a junk bin.
Now, within democratic and peaceful parameters, what do we ordinary citizens do to rid our country of such a violent man? Are praying and marching – however necessary – our only options? Do we have to wait for the 2019 general election? Or are there other tools?
I do not know specifically what you should do in your unique world with your unique skills and passions – only you will know that. All I do know is that we need to do more.
If you are a spiritual person, begin an inter-faith, national prayer chain that prays continually – not for 24 hours – until Jacob Zuma is removed from power.
As a student, form a protest group like the anti-apartheid demonstration that occupied the steps of South Africa House in London for 1 408 days in the late 1980s.
As a musician, organise a concert of all the biggest acts in our country in aid of the victims of Jacob Zuma’s regime.
If you or your establishment has a South African flag, fly it at half-mast until Zuma is deposed.
We cannot just march as we did on Friday, as a once off. It takes years – sometimes decades – of sustained and focused national and international effort and pressure to bring down corrupt regimes and despotic leaders.
* Justin Foxton is founder of The Peace Agency. His writing is dedicated to the memory of Anene Booysens and Emmanuel Josias Sithole.
** The views expressed here are not necessarily those of Independent Media.