DURBAN – IT MAY be fashionable and trendy, but wearing camo or army print clothing can land you in hot water with a jail term of up to five years. 
This is what the South African National Defence Force (SANDF) has said after it was established that too many members of the public used similar clothing to members of the SANDF. 
It made it difficult to differentiate between members of the public and officials. 
The Defence Act 42 of 2002, Section 104 (5) and (6) stipulates that: “Any person who, without authority, possesses or wears prescribed uniforms, distinctive marks or crests, or performs any prohibited act while wearing such uniform or with such uniform, distinctive marks or crests, is guilty of an offence and liable on conviction to a fine or imprisonment for a period not exceeding five years.” 
SANDF spokesman Brigadier Masi Mgobozi said the SANDF was “highly concerned” by the growing trend among the public who, knowingly or unknowingly, wore and or were in possession of, either complete or various items of the SANDF combat dress (camouflage) illegally. 
He said it was not just Armed Forces Day which was held in Durban in February that prompted them to issue a warning, but the SANDF noticed that more and more people were wearing SANDF-related clothing. 
With regards to SANDF uniforms, Mgobozi said: “Members of the public are advised that the SANDF camouflage has been registered (patented) for use solely by authorised members of the SANDF and or by those members identified by the chief of the SANDF General Solly Shoke and appointed as honorary members of the various SANDF units and or bases.” 
He said even when a member of the SANDF retired, passed away, or resigned from active duty, the person’s family members could and should not wear, model, display and or sell any items of the SANDF uniform. 
“Members of the public who are illegally in possession of a complete or various items of the SANDF camouflage uniform, are urged and encouraged to return the uniform items to their nearest SANDF base or unit,” he urged. 
Camo prints have become an international trend with celebrities like Rihanna, Kim Kardashian and Kanye West spotted wearing them. 
In the Durban CBD, the prints can be bought from a number of stores for as little as R50 for a camo printed T-shirt or pants. 
Fashion commentator Thandolwethu Tsekiso said the SANDF was “over-reacting”. 
She said camo prints were big internationally and there were many variations.
“Not all of it looks similar to SANDF prints. There are so many tones and styles. I own a pair of pants which are camo print and they look nothing like SANDF prints,” said Tsekiso. 
 nabeelah.shaikh@inl.co.za
 
SUNDAY TRIBUNE