Colourful
 - a thought provoking dance production that centers around the 
Apartheid regime is set to stage at the Playhouse theatre this week. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Under
 the auspices of the Wentworth Arts and Culture organisation 
professional development programme and supported by the NAC, this is the
 first professional showcase that is choreographed and directed by 
Jarryd Watson.  
Tonight spoke to Watson about what’s in store for audiences. 
Tell us about Colourful? 
It’s
 is a dance production that tells the story of the lives of many South 
Africans' from the transition of apartheid to democracy and all the 
different journeys they experienced during these two eras. The style of 
the show is contemporary and hip hop genre dancing with a narration from
 a poet where the dancers  also perform to his lyrics. 

And the name? 
The
 name Colourful came from the old apartheid South African flag and the 
new democracy South African flag. The dancers costumes are also the 
colours of the two flags, depicting the apartheid regime and the 
democracy.  It also came from the diverse rainbow nation we have in 
South Africa.

What dances have you incorporated into the production? 
The
 dance routines are contemporary dance in the first half of the show, 
where a lot of the movement are lyrical performances that have daring 
lifts with our partner work but the abstract contemporary style also 
tell the story of the segregation during apartheid, specifically the 
group areas act, the non - interracial act and the pencil test that was 
used to determine one’s race. I used quite a bit of the artist Ben 
Harper's songs entitled oppression and gospel. Both these songs were 
very fitting to show how many South Africans were oppressed by the 
Apartheid regime and with the gospel song how those who got together to 
stand against apartheid. The  "Sweet disposition" song by the group 
Temper Trap is used in the democracy scene and reveals the solace of 
many South Africans in today’s democracy. The narration is said by a 
poet and came from the voices of many communities.  

It’s your first professional production, why the wait? 
Well
 in the arts industry it takes a long time to build up a repertoire and 
in order to receive arts funding you have to be doing work for 5-7 years
 so even though I have been eligible for a while  to meet the criteria 
our organisation only received funding last year to put on professional 
work. 

How are coping with the nerves of putting on a professional performance? 
I'm
 anxious as this is the first show where I am appealing to a different 
audiences to support oppose those who know me from the community. So 
while I’m excited about this I’m also very anxious as I don’t know how 
the greater Durban audiences will react to this.

Tell me more about the Wentworth Arts and Culture organisation and the work that is done there.
It
 has been in existences 23 years and is a multi arts organisation that 
works in the development of arts in dance, music, drama, film, poetry 
and visual arts with the disadvantaged youth and artists to provide 
opportunity and exposure within the arts industry for them. I have been 
working with the organisation for 10  years now.

What reactions are you hoping for?
Well
 what any choreographer and director want, and that’s for the audience 
to appreciate and enjoy the work we do. More so, to identify with the 
story been told, as Colourful showcases the voice of many South 
Africans. 

Why should audience watch the show? 
Because
 it’s thought provoking, controversial, enlightening  and entertaining 
to watch as it also concurrently runs with the political situation our 
country is experiencing. 

* Colourful
 will run for only two shows on April 22 at 2pm and 7pm. Tickets are R120 and
 are available at computicket and at the 2pm show. Block booking 
concessions are available for schools, social groups, youth groups and 
other groups. For more information on tickets and concessions contact 
082 683 9665.