After weeks of speculation, Cape Town Port manager Sipho Nzuza has been appointed eThekwini Municipality’s new city manager. 
But he might have to hold off popping the champagne corks as the former city manager, S’bu Sithole, is to challenge his appointment. 
“I have written to the municipality because I still want to understand how I scored the lowest. To date I have not received any reply. This means that I must weigh my options whether to approach this legally,” he said. 
Nzuza is expected to be officially announced on Wednesday at the executive committee meeting at City Hall. 
Mayor Zandile Gumede said: “I am very excited about his appointment. He has all the required experience and qualifications.” 
Nzuza emerged as the frontrunner after the interviews conducted earlier this year. The interviewing process was overseen by Exco members who are from different political parties. 
Gumede said Nzuza’s appointment came at the right time as the city was fast-tracking so-called radical economic transformation. 
When asked about his appointment, Nzuza said: “Yes, I can confirm that, but please call me later.” Attempts to contact him later were unsuccessful. 
Nzuza previously served as chairperson for eThekwini’s audit committee for six years. He worked for Transnet National Ports Authority (TNPA) for more than eight years.
The Sunday Tribune broke the news last month that Nzuza was being tipped to take over the city manager’s post.
Nzuza will start his five-year contract next Monday. 
A senior city official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said Nzuza was endorsed “because of his wealth of experience and qualifications”. He has an MBA and a higher diploma in taxation from the University of KwaZulu-Natal and a BCom from Unisa. 
A massive task lies ahead for Nzuza as he has to steer the city to a clean audit. He will oversee the expenditure of the city’s R45 billion budget for this financial year. 
Sithole, who earned a total salary package of R3.1 million a year, was praised last year for steering the city to its first clean audit in 16 years. Nzuza’s salary package will also be within this range. 
Sithole, who was employed during former mayor James Nxumalo’s tenure, did not see eye-to-eye with Gumede on many issues, including the so-called crack team aimed at ensuring the city delivered on its plans for critical interventions when she took the reins. 
Sithole raised his concerns about the team and instructed heads of portfolios not to co-operate. Gumede suspended Sithole with pay 18 days before his December 31 contract expired. 
Sithole was lauded for remedying the financial affairs of uMsunduzi Municipality which was on the brink of collapse. 
Lennox Mabaso, spokesperson for the KZN Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs, directed all enquiries to the municipality. 
Zwakele Mncwango, DA caucus leader in eThekwini and party provincial leader, said although the party was not happy with the process leading to Nzuza’s appointment, “we welcome it”.
“We hope he will not be compromised by the ANC’s political agenda. We will give him a chance but watch him very closely,” Mncwango said. 
He said he hoped Nzuza would use his experience in oceans economy to help the city in this sector, which he said was still lagging.
SUNDAY TRIBUNE