It was a day of high drama for the national police yesterday as Minister Fikile Mbalula ordered the police to find former Hawks head Berning Ntlemeza and seize a state car and cellphone in his possession.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
This came after the axed Hawks head reported for work through a back entrance, dodging the media who were waiting for him, and then asked for a state vehicle.
Mbalula told a press briefing on Monday that he had ordered acting national police commissioner Johannes Phahlane to find Ntlemeza and seize the vehicle and his cellphone.
“We’ve been informed that General Ntlemeza entered the management meeting of the Hawks, at the Hawks headquarters this morning, and ordered the head of supply chain to give him a car which is now roaming around the streets of Pretoria, or wherever he is this afternoon. He also has a cellphone of the government's in his possession,” Mbalula told journalists at the Directorate for Priority Crime Investigation, popularly known as the Hawks, in Pretoria.
“He (Ntlemeza) has no right to enter and instruct anybody to take orders from him. I have explained that to (acting Hawks head) Lieutenant-General (Yolisa) Matakata, too, and she understands that very well. We don’t need this drama and this Hollywood movie.”
But Ntlemeza’s lawyer, Comfort Ngidi, said they would be filing court papers today to interdict Mbalula from preventing his client from executing his duties.
Ngidi is adamant that Ntlemeza is entitled to remain in his job until the Supreme Court of Appeal has disposed of the matter. 
Ngidi said the High Court in Pretoria’s decision to axe Ntlemeza would not apply because the appeal in the SCA was still pending.
“I have already instructed the advocate to prepare papers. By the end of business (on Tuesday) the process will be clearer,” said Ngidi.
When questioned about whether Ntlemeza had political backing, Mbalula said on Monday: “I don’t think he has got any political backing. I think he believes that he has got political backing.”
Ngidi said he was not aware of politics playing a role in the matter and said it centred around the interpretation of the law.
“I am not aware of any politics. All I know is that my client is a professional policeman and he has instructed me to represent him in a legal matter.”
Ngidi would also not say if Ntlemeza was paying the legal costs from his own pocket.
However, Mbalula’s spokesman Vuyo Mhaga confirmed that the state was not covering Ntlemeza’s legal bills.
Political analyst Professor Somadoda Fikeni said he doubted that there was any political backing for Ntlemeza.
Professor Roger Southall of Wits University said the showdown between Ntlemeza and Mbalula was not good for the Hawks' credibility.
“I think their credibility is fragile because we know from statistics that the number of prosecutions is lower than the Scorpions,” he said. 
The portfolio committee on police in Parliament yesterday called on Ntlemeza to respect the judgments of the courts.
Chairman of the committee Francois Beukman said Ntlemeza could not be a law unto himself.
“The committee maintains that there is a decision by the High Court that his appointment is invalid,” said Beukman.
He said Ntlemeza must respect the court's decision.
Beukman also said he would look at the DA's request for an urgent meeting of the committee to deal with the Ntlemeza matter.
The DA has proposed an inquiry into Ntlemeza's fitness to hold office. 
This would be done in tandem with his court appeal.
DA spokesman on police Zakhele Mbhele said the inquiry would set the record straight.
Mbhele said the committee had the power to act in matters of this nature, and would have to act urgently. 
The Mercury