DURBAN - With seven rounds left in the PSL, KwaZulu-Natal clubs, Golden Arrows and Maritzburg United, will have to do a bit of nifty juggling if they are to finish in the top eight.
Both teams suffered mid-week losses on the road - Arrows were humbled 3-0 by Wits who went top of the standings, and Maritzburg were downed 2-0 by Orlando Pirates, who registered their first league win in 13 matches. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The first loss in four league and Cup assignments for Arrows left them in sixth spot, a position they will retain regardless of the outcome of Saturday’s home clash against Ajax Cape Town. 

However, with up to five players sitting on three yellow cards, and a Nedbank Cup quarter-final against Platinum Stars to follow after Ajax, the Durban team face a tricky task in balancing league and Cup demands. 

It’s equally tough for eighth-placed Maritzburg. They are in a more vulnerable position ahead of Friday's showdown against Baroka FC. The loss at Pirates also cost them after Brian Onyango and Deolin Mekoa were sent off. 

It means they will miss Kenyan international defender Onyango and junior international winger Mekoa against Baroka and Chippa United. 

Arrows coach Clinton Larsen lamented their showing against Wits, although overall he is happy that the young squad maintained a strong presence in the top half of the standings in their second season following promotion.  

Barring one change, he stuck with the same team that started the Cup match, in a bid to maintain consistency, but fatigue and inexperience took its toll against Wits. 

“We’ve got seven games to go. We’re still in a position where we’re competing for a top-eight place. We’re still a couple of points clear of the chasing pack. There are 21 points to play for and we’ll continue to fight for those points,” Larsen said. 

After Saturday, they visit Polokwane City, host Sundowns, trek to Kaizer Chiefs, and tackle Baroka, Cape Town City and Pirates to close the season late next month.
Mercury