FREE STATE - Christian evangelist Angus Buchan had South Africans on their knees yesterday when hundreds of thousands gathered on a remote farm in the Free State to pray for the country and its leadership yesterday.
From the early hours there was heavy traffic on the roads leading to Bloemfontein.
Buchan used to farm in Greytown in KwaZulu-Natal until his career as a pastor took off with the success of his book Faith Like Potatoes, which was made into a movie. He started his ministry while still a farmer, preaching in the area.
Yesterday’s event, called It’s Time, was attended by all races and all language groups. In the afternoon Buchan and related hashtags were trending on Twitter across South Africa.
“#It’sTime for God to take back His nation”, tweeted Foster Nkuna while @Zagreuss tweeted, “In 1990 we prayed for De Klerk, in 1994 for Mandela. In 2017 more than 1.5 million will pray for Zuma to fall. God help us!”
@Canvasguru tweeted “#ProudlySouthAfrican. Blessed to live in a country where we can freely serve the Lord.”
Facebook, too, was alive with goodwill and national unity.
Margaret Mohr wrote, “There are many South Africans working in the UK as carers. We cannot be in Bloemfontein but a prayer chain has been formed and we will all be praying during that time.”
Yoko Papu said, “Hallelujah…this just brought me to tears… this country belongs to Jesus and I will be joining this prayer.”
Michael Zastron said, “Many of us expats will be attending a prayer service at the Baptist church in Woodvale, Perth (Australia) to coincide with the meeting in Bloemfontein. We are expecting a good turnout. Pastor Angus, we will stand together in prayer along with you and all South Africans currently living in SA. God bless South Africa.” 
Wouter Fouche wrote, “We are living in Thailand and last night four South Africans on Koh Samui got together to pray for the meeting in Bloemfontein.”
Dabulamanzi Bhulu Jerreth Maseko said, “We thank God for our father and grandfather Buchan for standing up and providing leadership beyond this morass, he is displaying an Elijan spirit. Let this meeting be a seed that will start similar prayer meetings in homes, blocks, streets and communities. South Africa is at the abyss today because good men and women have (been) cowed and kept quiet.”
Dane Cassisa said, “As a South African, I will be lifting my country and backing my brothers and sisters in prayer at the time of this event from Oregon, USA.” While in Canada Yvette Cook said, “God bless them and fulfil Your victory for this nation.”
Ruth Croeser said SA expats in Zambia would pray at Mulungushi Village in Kalundu in Lusaka and she asked others to join in.
Faizel Mohamed declared, “Finally we turn to God. How awesome.”
Connie Sange Majambase said, “We need this in our day. God bless our land.”
Buchan has in the past faced criticism for his conservative Christian views especially on the dominant role of men in relationships and corporal punishment for children. He is also perceived to be anti-gay. 
Yesterday, though, the impact of his call to prayer was to unite and calm the crowd. 
SUNDAY TRIBUNE