Durban Zulu home-language speakers may soon use their mother tongue to apply for a space at KwaZulu-Natal institutions of higher learning.Central Applications Office chief executive George van der Ross said they were working with a translation academic to translate the CAO handbook into Zulu. This is being implemented in a phased manner, said Ross.The Mercury had learnt that applicants sometimes made mistakes while applying due to language difficulties. A Grade 12 student applying for a space at a university had mistakenly replied No to a question that sought to know if she would need accommodation.Another erroneously applied for a postgraduate degree because they saw it on their handbook, not understanding that it required an undergraduate qualification.Van der Ross said the office facilitates the completion of application forms in several ways, including through a partnership with the Department of Education districts, by conducting Life Orientation teacher workshops to assist the applicants. Every year we attend over 40 career fairs and last year we attended 979 rural and 345 urban schools (145064 pupils), where the application process was explained to pupils. He said each pupil was provided with, among other things, a current handbook (about 200 pages) that provides guidance for completion of the applications form.The pupil also has an opportunity to correct mistakes, through calling the contact centre or sending an SMS, e-mail or fax to correct the error. They are also alerted to errors or omissions on their initial application with the acknowledgement letter each applicant receives when his or her application is processed.Van der Ross said there was no mistakes analysis available and no research to ascertain what would lead to the errors . It is difficult to differentiate between mistakes and changes in circumstances , but the acknowledgement letter allows the applicant to review his or her initial application information and to make changes. The applicant is free to make whatever change he or she wishes to make throughout the application cycle. The applicant is also regularly reminded of omissions, if any. Van der Ross said the most serious mistakes were when applicants did not provide any contact details. UKZN spokesperson Lesiba Seshoka said there were instances where applicants submitted applications regarding their need for accommodation. In this instance, students are advised to apply, and will be accommodated if there are spaces available, he said.The Mercury