Durban Finance Minister Pravin Gordhan has come under fire from the Progressive Professionals Forum (PPF) after he called for action against a Sars senior official who risked the country s investment profile by attacking rating agencies in the media .The PPF is led by President Jacob Zuma s ally Mzwanele Manyi, who had in the past expressed unhappiness about Gordhan. The debacle started when Gordhan expressed his displeasure about Sars s group executive manager for employment relations Luther Lebelo s letter which appeared in the Business Day last year.Lebelo s letter was published in November before Standard &amp; Poor s made its announcement about its rating of the country last month. He described the rating agencies as gangs used by Europe and America to whip us into line . Gordhan was unhappy with Lebelo s comment, which he had made in his capacity as the spokesperson of the PPF, and called for Sars to reprimand him. Lebelo had accused the agencies of using colonial and apartheid times tactics of dealing with developing countries. The gang uses the whip to impose on developing countries their preferred economic and social system, which ultimately dictates how a supposedly free SA must behave, robbing us of the critical right to define our own destiny, a right that was central to our liberation struggle, he said.He said the agencies had tamed the ANC-led government in such a way that it could not address the issues of unemployment, poverty, inequality, landlessness and homelessness, which affected black people. The government is threatened with economic violence every time it tries to implement projects and programmes to relieve the poor from their daily agony. The ANC is more worried about what the rating agencies will think than about what the poor African majority thinks, hence its gradual loss of electoral power, he said. After the DA finance spokesman David Maynier had written to Parliament complaining about Lebelo s views, Gordhan issued a reply, which slammed Lebelo s utterances. He said the comment was likely to cost South Africa its investment grading . He said this was likely to lead to a situation that would affect the poor people if interest rates rose. Finally, his letter to the media indicates clearly that he writes in two capacities one of which is Group Executive of Employment Relations, Sars . The Sars management must account for their lack of action in this matter, said Gordhan.The PPF on Tuesday defended its spokesman saying he should be allowed to enjoy the right of freedom of speech . It said instead of worrying about Lebelo s views, Gordhan should focus on coordinating macroeconomic policy and promoting the national policy framework . The PPF s view is that Gordhan in his pandering antics to the DA and white monopoly capital is interfering with the operation of Sars by indirectly instructing the management of SARS to take action against Lebelo. Lebelo will not be silenced for speaking in his individual capacity or on behalf of PPF, read the PPF statement. Sars could not be reached for comment at the time of going to print.The Mercury