Durban - THE ANC Youth League (ANCYL) in KwaZulu-Natal has given Absa bank an ultimatum of three weeks to start paying back a R2.25-billion bailout it received from the apartheid government. This follows a preliminary public protector report, which was leaked, and reportedly found that the bank had never repaid the money and that it could now owe as much as R2.25bn.However, Absa said it would make submissions to the public protector to correct factual and legal inaccuracies.According to the bank, the SA Reserve Bank had bailed out Bankcorp in 1985.In April 1992, Absa acquired Bankcorp and it claimed that all obligations related to the Reserve Bank assistance had been discharged in full by October 1995. But the youth league is adamant that the money was not returned and has placed Absa on terms to repay the money or face indefinite disruptions. As part of the disruption campaign, ANCYL leaders in KwaZulu-Natal with a large group of their supporters protested at the bank s branch in Anton Lembede Street in Durban s CBD on Thursday. The protesters briefly entered the bank premises and toyi-toyied inside while holding up banknotes and shouting Sifuni mali yethu (we want our money). The group then moved outside and blocked the entrance to the building. During the protest, which lasted for about four hours, the branch operations came to a halt as customers were blocked from entering, and those who attempted to use ATMs were shouted at by the protesters.A picket was also held at an Absa branch in Ixopo on Thursday.ANCYL provincial secretary Thanduxolo Sabelo said the financial institution would suffer indefi- nite disruptions if it did not pay back the money. OccupyHe said Absa could pay the money in instalments. If they do not pay the first instalment on February 15 we are going to occupy every building of Absa on the important (pay) days, the 15th, 25th and last day of the month. Sabelo called on KZN Premier Willies Mchunu to remove all provincial government accounts from Absa.He also suggested that the government should move its accounts to Ithala Bank, and that the Reserve Bank should move with speed in granting Ithala a full operational licence. He said once Absa returned the money it would be used for community development projects. This money can help our brothers and sisters to receive free education. The R2bn can build thousands of houses for homeless people, he said. ANCYL eThekwini chairperson Thembo Ntuli said the league would go as far as disrupting Absa-sponsored sport activities in the province.KwaZulu-Natal Absa regional executive officer for customer network Rajiv Singh said he would pass the youth league s demands on to the bank s national office.He said the bank was dealing with the matter with the relevant authorities.Absa KwaZulu-Natal spokesperson Dante Mashile said the bank s management had allowed members of the youth league to protest inside the bank because we cannot stop people from entering the bank . If people want to come in, they can do so, but they cannot be violent, said Mashile.The Mercury