Durban A professor at the University of KwaZulu-Natal was one of 12 worldwide to receive a sought-after grant from US biotechnology company Gilead Sciences to further the fight against Aids. Professor Thumbi Ndung * , based at the Sub-Saharan African Network for TB/HIV Research Excellence (Santhe), was the only recipient based in South Africa to be given a portion of the total $22m (R298m) Gilead gave to fund projects by leading academic institutions, NPOs and community groups. He was given $2.8m to fund an ongoing research project entitled &quot;The FRESH study: Females Rising through Education, Support and Health (FRESH) Acute HIV Infection Cohort .Ndung * said he was excited by what the grant could do for the project. The study will generate knowledge that will inform vaccine development and HIV cure strategies and, as such, will help to advance African science and fight HIV/Aids. He said the FRESH study had been in progress for three years. It identifies women with acute HIV infection, as early as possible following infection. Study participants are then started on antiretroviral therapy immediately. The aim, Ndung * said, was to measure the viral reservoir to see where the virus hides and, from there, try to understand why it is so difficult to cure. Researchers also want to see whether early treatment makes it easier to eradicate the virus. Ndung * said the study had an element of social empowerment. We recruit high-risk females, providing them with social services in the form of an empowerment curriculum, thereby reducing their vulnerability to acquiring HIV. He said researchers hoped to lessen the risks the women faced through education. The awarding of the grant follows Ndung'* s election as a member of the Academy of Science of South Africa in November last year. While he does not lecture at UKZN, Ndung * mentors a number of students. He is Santhe s programme director, as well as director of the HIV Pathogenesis Programme. He is also head of a laboratory at the African Health Research Institute, which is based at UKZN. The Mercury