Durban Poor, underprivileged children are lagging behind their better-off counterparts in terms of participating in maths in high school, which affects their career prospects.This is according to a study commissioned by the South African Mathematics Foundation (SAMF), on how curriculum changes over the years have affected participation rates in high school maths.There have been a number of other curriculum changes since 1994, including:* Outcomes-Based Education and the Common Task for Assessment* Curriculum 2005* The introduction of Technical Mathematics and Technical Science in technical schools in Grade 10 from 2016. These changes, as well as the introduction of maths literacy as an alternative to maths in the Further Education and Training (FET) phase (Grades 10 to 12), were taken into consideration to examine access to maths in the FET phase, the foundation said.In its study, the foundation compared the number of pupils doing Grade 9 maths at a school with the number doing maths there three years later. Current participation rates in FET phase maths were also compared with previous participation rates.According to Vasuthavan Govender, the president of the Association for Mathematics Education of South Africa, in general, more pupils were taking maths in the FET phase. This has given more learners access to science- related careers, SAMF said. But this finding was not across the board. Schools in certain geographical areas lag behind in terms of access to maths in the FET phase, it said. This means pupils at schools in these areas are unlikely to pursue careers in the sciences and engineering. These areas, Govender said, were less affluent and underprivileged. Asked for the possible reason behind this, he said, There is a lack of parental involvement, poor socio-economic conditions, unemployment; gangsterism. Maths is not taken seriously in the community there is a focus on other issues. Executive director of the National Professional Teachers Organisation of South Africa, Basil Manuel, said part of the problem was that maths was linked to English. If a child s grasp of the language is weak, their maths won t be good. He also said children from rural, poor backgrounds were not exposed to the modern economy from as early an age as other children. Manuel said the focus should be on getting the foundations right. Get the foundation phase right, get a love for maths established and the deficit disappears. The deputy president of the National African Teachers Union (Natu), Allen Thompson, told The Mercury that overcrowded classrooms and a lack of competent, specialised maths teachers in the rural areas were at the core of the problem.The Mercury