Durban - The DA in KwaZulu-Natal has slammed the province s Basic Education Department over what it labelled an extravagant, Hollywood-style function last week to officially release the 2016 matric results and recognise the province s top achievers. The department hosted dignitaries and some of KZN s top achievers and their families at the Inkosi Albert Luthuli International Convention Centre in Durban. MEC Mthandeni Dlungwana gave a briefing on the province s matric results, which had improved from 60.7% in 2015 to 66.4% in 2016. The matriculants including the top 10 in the province; the top five in each of its 12 districts; the top five in maths, science and accounting; and the top five in maths, science and accounting against adversity were recognised for their achievements.Afterwards a buffet lunch was provided. DA MPL Francois Rodgers said at the weekend that his party would write to the MEC to establish how much his department had spent on the function. The excessive nature of the function was horrifying, with glamorous banquet-styled tables and top catering for well over 1 000 guests. Rodgers said the DA fully acknowledged that top achievers needed to be recognised and congratulated. However, the over-the-top occasion witnessed last week is highly questionable, given that the province s education department is in the midst of a financial crisis. Under the current circumstances there can be no justification whatsoever for such runaway expenditure . The department on Sunday defended the function as a once-a-year celebration of its top achievers. The function is held to let our top achievers know that we appreciate them, Basic Education spokesperson Kwazi Mthethwa said. The department was also very proud of the fact that it had improved the province's pass rate, after declines in both 2014 and 2015.This is not the only matric-related spending that has been criticised. Last Wednesday the city held a night vigil to pray for positive matric results when they were released the following day, and to offer support. The event cost R750000, with artists including gospel singer Sgwili, Amazing Grace, Babo Ngcobo, T zozo, Happygal, GTI, Nathi no nkanyiso and Melusi Mbokazi performing and free transport for some. The ANC Youth League called the function fruitless expenditure . The DA said it was pointless . The city called it a success.The Mercury