Durban - Police are investigating the death of former golf star Wayne Westner, who allegedly shot and killed himself on Wednesday.Police spokesperson Lieutenant-Colonel Thulani Zwane confirmed the incident and said an inquest was opened after a 55-year-old man allegedly shot himself in front of his wife following a reported domestic dispute in Pennington on the South Coast.Westner, said a police source, had arrived from Johannesburg where he and his family had another home and had forced his way into his wife s residential unit on the estate.She locked herself in the bathroom and, when she emerged, he allegedly shot himself in the head with a gun he had brought with him.His body was removed shortly after the incident at 8am at the Gwala Gwala Estate in Rahle Road, to the KZN Medico-Legal Mortuary in Park Rynie for a post-mortem examination.During a stellar career in which he rubbed shoulders with greats such as Ernie Els, Mark McNulty and Retief Goosen, Westner won 14 professional tournaments, including two South African Opens, two European Tour events and the 1996 World Cup of Golf (partnered with Els).Westner, whose nickname was Westy , had to cut short his career in 1998 because of a leg injury. Westner, as reported on his website, was the inventor of the golf training machine, Instant Golfer.A close friend, who did not want to be named because of the nature of the incident, said the golfer had had a rough 10 years . I ve known him for more than four years and I knew him to be very private and subdued. The training machine, he said, had given Westner a new lease on life. In a week or two, he and his son, in his 20s, were set to go to the US to promote it. He was very excited. I don t understand what happened today. He said he could not comment on the incident because he did not have all the details. I can say that we are all saddened and shocked by this loss. Meanwhile, tributes to Westner began pouring in on social media. Sad day, our friend Wayne Westner passed today. Great memories thank you my friend, tweeted Els.South African-born professional and Major winner, Justin Rose, tweeted: So sad. A true gentleman of the game. Former professional golfer Ryan Dreyer wrote on &shy;Facebook: I am so sad today. I just found out that my friend and very first swing teacher was killed today. Rest in Peace Wayne Westner, he wrote. The Mercury