Durban Department of Social Development spokesperson Lumka Oliphant s calling detractors of Minister Bathabile Dlamini the children of the whore of the town perpetuates violent attitudes towards women, gender experts said on Monday. A selection of Durban-based experts told The Mercury that Oliphant should face consequences for her comments, and that her behaviour as a civil servant was abhorrent . Oliphant wrote in a rant on Facebook last week in response to claims that Dlamini was intoxicated at an event in Germiston If you have said that Bathabile drinks, I say that your mother is the whore of the town. You can identify an alcoholic because your mother is one. She added that the minister was against alcohol: If it were all up to her, South Africa would not be drinking. Oliphant apologised for her comments on Monday, calling them unfortunate and regrettable . She did not comment on whether she would resign. This is a context where women are under siege, said gender expert professor Relebohile Moletsane of UKZN. Why would a woman perpetuate this attitude? It is unfortunate.&quot; She has insulted the whole country, and particularly women. She has behaved abhorrently as a civil servant. Professor Maheshvari Naidu, of UKZN s school of social sciences, called the outburst juvenile. To insist that the minister stands for the end of gender-based violence in the same breath as referring to mothers as whores is shocking to say the least. Chairperson of Agenda Feminist Media Janine Hicks said Oliphant s comments revealed the public s deeply held negative attitudes towards sex workers. Sex workers are vulnerable, marginalised, and have criminal status, and they need access to basic labour and human rights. Comments like this fuel the stigma and abuse towards sex workers. Hicks said Oliphant should take it upon herself to volunteer at an organisation that supports sex workers to educate herself so she learns not to trivialise the stigma they face.Moletsane said Oliphant should face consequences. In a normal country she would have been fired by now or at least suspended, or some action would have been taken to acknowledge what she did was wrong. Naidu added: I think the clamour for her resignation is understandable. However, one wonders how she came to occupy such a position in the first place. In a statement on Monday, the National Freedom Party dismissed Oliphant s apology and called for her removal. The Mercury