Durban A 19-year-old boy is the latest victim of the ongoing shootings, suspected to be politically motivated, in Inchanga township outside Durban.Zamo Ngcobo was shot in the stomach, shoulder and inner thigh by unknown people who accosted him at his family home in Inchanga on Thursday night. He survived the shooting and is recovering in hospital.Ngcobo is one of two who were shot last week, according to community members.The attackers allegedly cut through fencing wire at the family s home and found Ngcobo in the yard, where they shot him.His family rushed him to hospital.His sister, who declined to be named, said they suspected that the shooting was related to the ongoing political clashes in the area. We are members of the SACP and I believe this is part of that ongoing fight. We are both politically active, we always went to rallies together wherever I went, he would be there, too. We do not know any other reason why he would be shot. We are still waiting for him to fully recover, so he can tell us if the attackers said anything that might give any other indication of why he was attacked. She said there was an atmosphere of fear in the area. Zamo was shot on Thursday and on Friday, another boy was also shot in the township, but fortunately he survived. Another source who was aware of Ngcobo s shooting said he was politically active, although he held no position in any structure in the area. When there were riots in the area and houses were being burned, his house is among the houses that were burned, said the source. The thing that is happening now is that the political violence of the past is being used to cover up assassinations.&quot;&quot;I believe this is no longer just about politics but all about old feuds that are being reignited and people are hiding behind politics to settle old scores. If it was politically motivated, Ngcobo would be at least the eighth person shot in Inchanga due to political strife since December. The township, which has been on knife-edge since the run-up to the August 3 elections, has been plagued by suspected political killings.Last year, at least five people were killed in just one week.PR Councillor Boy Shozi said he was aware of the two latest shootings. I believe it is still the ongoing political issues. He said to stop the violence and the killings, the people of Inchanga should take responsibility, and sit down and talk over the problem.Police spokesperson Colonel Thembeka Mbele said a case of attempted murder had been registered for investigation by Inchanga police station. The suspects were unknown.The Mercury