Mthatha The battle for control of the ANC took a turn on Sunday when party deputy president Cyril Ramaphosa, secretary-general Gwede Mantashe and treasurer Zweli Mkhize used the 105th birthday celebrations to indicate their intentions to blow the race wide open.Their comments, coming just days after President Jacob Zuma said outgoing AU Commission chairperson Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma was ready to ascend to the throne, could be seen to be efforts to scupper her bid for the top job.Mantashe, Mkhize and Ramaphosa and labour federation Cosatu are believed to be in a slate that is opposed to Dlamini-Zuma, who is backed by the president, some provincial premiers and key elements of the tripartite alliance. Sunday, the Ramaphosa slate fought back, although it didn t mention anyone by name.In his address to the ANC provincial rally in the Eastern Cape, Ramaphosa warned ANC members to be conscious enough and never elect or support party leaders who steal public funds.Speaking at the Walter Sisulu University in Mthatha during the ANC s 105th anniversary celebrations, he called on party members not to allow factional groupings to manipulate branches to support their preferred candidates.Addressing a similar party event in George in the Western Cape, Mantashe told party members to be wary of people who campaigned for either themselves, their friends or family members.Mkhize also warned party members in KwaDukuza in KwaZulu-Natal not to be drawn into factional battles because factions don t win elections.Zuma, who made a surprise appearance at the same rally where Mkhize was scheduled to be the keynote speaker, urged party members to prepare for the policy conference in Gauteng in June instead of engaging in factional battles.Ramaphosa spared no effort in launching a broadside at party leaders. He said the ANC had leaders who, after being elected into positions, tended to loot state resources for their selfish gains. ANC branches have always displayed unity. The problem is with leaders who divide branches for their personal gains. We must also face the reality about factionalists who use taxpayers money to buy votes from branch members to advance their political agendas, he warned. We must also acknowledge that there are instances where internal ANC processes have been infiltrated by individuals and companies seeking preferential access to state businesses and resources, he added.Mantashe also hit hard at those using their families to be elected into positions. In what also appears to be a swipe at Zuma, Mantashe warned against electing leaders based on gender. The debate on the presidency people say we want a woman president. No we don t want a woman president, we want the president of the ANC, whether that president is a woman or a man, he told a cheering crowd. That is why (we should) never base the debate of 2017 on a tradition that does not exist. So if we are saying a certain deputy president must not ascend to the position of president, give an argument as to why, where they are incompetent or not performing, he said. And if you do not provide an explanation or say we must not have a debate, then both assertions are flawed, he said.Mantashe also warned against people campaigning for themselves, their friends or families. Beware of those who come to you because they are lobbying for their friends and the manner of these runners, he said. Look for the people who are campaigning for friends and associates, look for people who want to be elected because they have personal interests, he said.Zuma called on party members to stop talking about succession. Instead they must prepare for the forthcoming policy conference. It is like people are possessed with positions. They like talking about this from dawn to dusk, he said. People want the policy conference in June to discuss positions, he said. Don t look for your friend to occupy a position, look for a talented comrade who would be able to work for the ANC, he said.Mkhize warned against factionalism in the party. We must never agree to be recruited by factions. You must stick to the policies of the ANC and make it strong and unite the ANC, because you want to inherit the ANC when it is still in charge of the country. &quot;You don t want to inherit an ANC that has lost elections, he said. There is no faction that can win in the conference and then win the elections for the ANC. The conference must be won by the ANC. We must refuse to be drawn into factionalism, said Mkhize.The Star