Durban - Private investigators have been hired to trace the source of a defaming letter circulating on social networks about eThekwini mayor Zandile Gumede giving tenders to Indians in exchange for houses in upmarket suburbs in Durban and Stanger.Billionaire businessman Vivian Reddy, named as one of the beneficiaries of Gumede s issued tenders, said on Wednesday he had consulted an investigating company as he wanted to take legal action against the author. The false, malicious allegations against the Indian community deserve to be treated with contempt. To ensure the nonsense stops, I have engaged a specialist company to investigate the origin of the social media placing, he said. The letter alleged that Gumede had acquired seven properties in uMhlanga, Ballito, Brettenwood Estate, in KwaDukuza, Hillcrest and Westville, after taking over the highest office in the municipality.The letter, whose author has not been disclosed, said Indians had been exclusively awarded lucrative tenders, although they vote for the DA, while black people who vote for the ANC had been sidelined. ANC members believe the letter has been circulated by people aggrieved with Gumede being elected ANC eThekwini regional chairwoman ahead of former mayor James Nxumalo. These people are suspecting us of circulating the letter, but I m sure this comes from people close to Zandile, who are now turning against her, said an ANC member who backed Nxumalo. The letter, dated January 22, read: Vivian Reddy is one of the prominent Indian families to have benefited from this municipality without any shame of not developing black contractors in Durban. The only company that has the rating level of 9EP and 9EB covering the electricity discipline in KZN is none other than Edison Power Group owned by Vivian Reddy. The letter detailed how young people employed in Gumede s office had been boasting about making money through the shoddy issuing of tenders, and that they were driving expensive cars and living in expensive apartments. These opportunistic Indian businessmen have played a very big role in the acquisitions of these exclusive properties whether for uMama uMkabayi (Gumede) or her boys, it read. Reddy said he was expecting more allegations in the lead-up to the ANC succession battle. Edison Power has not received a single tender from eThekwini for the past 10 years. We do not do any business with the province or the city, he said.Gumede s spokesperson, Mthunzi Gumede (not related), denied that Zandile Gumede had houses anywhere in the city or Stanger except the one she owns in Phoenix and her parents home in Amaoti, north of Durban. These are lies, and we don t want to dignify the rumour with a comment. She does not have a house in Durban North, and whoever said that must prove it. He said it was a matter of concern that the letter perpetuated racism.The Mercury