Durban - Investigative journalists and authors Jacques Pauw and Pieter-Louis Myburgh have welcomed the court decision to investigate the policeman who obtained warrants of arrests for them and the magistrate who signed off on the warrants.
Speaking to The Mercury  on Thursday, Pauw and Myburgh said this latest development in their saga displayed the “concerning” relationship between business people and the police. 

Myburgh said the decision in this case was a “very good opportunity to get to the bottom of the corrupt behaviour between police and business people”.

According to reports, Durban magistrate Irfaan Khallil ordered that Durban North Colonel Reuben Govender and a Ntuzuma magistrate be investigated for misconduct after Pauw and Myburgh were summoned to the Durban North police station and were allegedly threatened with arrest by Govender. 

On Facebook this week, Pauw wrote that although Govender, who he described as Durban businessman Roy Moodley’s “pet cop”, did not reveal who the complainant in the matter was, he was certain it was Moodley. 

“We know however that the complainant is Roy Moodley, (President Jacob) Zuma’s close friend and the man who paid him a salary while he was president. Govender tried three weeks ago to get a warrant for my arrest in Pietermaritzburg. He failed to do so,” Pauw wrote. 

Pauw said that Khallil’s order showed that there were still some honest people in law enforcement. 

He also confirmed he was in the process of drafting a lengthy and detailed submission on Govender’s conduct to the Independent Police Investigative Directorate.

“Govender is an extremely crooked and compromised cop and I think he really underestimated the public support we have because even when he went to Pietermaritzburg to try and get a warrant for my arrest, I was immediately called by people in the police and justice system warning us of what he was trying to do,” Pauw said. 

He claimed that Govender was also seen at least four times in the Durban Magistrate’s Court with Moodley in the past two weeks. 

Pauw alleged that Govender was a “protected cop” who had previously evaded investigation when he handled criminal cases in which Moodley, or those close to him, were the complainants in criminal matters and Govender made several arrests without warrants. Civil proceedings are now pending in these cases.

“He always seems to get away but this time, I can assure you, that we will not rest until Govender gets what he deserves. He is not fit to be a police officer and hopefully this is the end of Govender,” Pauw said. 

Myburgh voiced his concerns that investigative journalists revealing corrupt activities were being investigated  more intensely than “the real corrupt individuals”.

“It is troubling that for many years I have been working on corruption reports and there has never really been any real effort from the authorities. But, as soon as someone complains about journalists, the police in the pockets of others jump to probe us,” he said. 

Myburgh said the same enthusiasm was needed to investigate “proper corruption”.

Pauw is the author of best-seller The President’s Keepers and Myburgh wrote the book, The Republic of Gupta where he probed, and wrote about, several alleged corrupt relationships involving government officials.

It is believed Khallil also instructed that Govender’s conduct in obtaining the warrants be investigated by the head of detectives in KwaZulu-Natal, General Bala Naidoo, who is set to retire.

National police spokesman Brigadier Vishnu Naidoo said he could not comment on whether the head of detectives in the province was put on the case because he had not seen  the court order. 
The Mercury
