The festive season is a time for people to catch up with friends and family; complete last minute shopping; and eat to their heart’s content. It is a time where many people let their guard down to enjoy their surroundings. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
It is also a time when those wanting to take advantage of this down-time do so and criminal activity such as break-ins and theft tend to increase over this period.
“Home owners and estate managers have to take the appropriate security and safety precautions over this time, in order to keep their homes and estates in which they live safe and secure,” says sales director of Axis Communications Roy Alves.
Photo by Clem Onojeghuo on Unsplash

He offers some tips regarding home safety:

Inspect your CCTV cameras before the down-time starts, ensuring these are functioning optimally without any blind spots. If you live on an estate, on-site security guards should monitor the premises regularly;For estate homeowners, the key to effective security lies in being able to detect a potential intruder before they gain access. This can be done through an analytics application which allows for proactive surveillance, assisting security staff at estates to detect and deter crime proactively. The application can, for example, detect trespassers or loiters and automatically notify a guard or play a message over a loudspeaker;Rather than static cameras, look into network cameras that are connected to an IT network at your home or estate. These are digital and linked to the IP infrastructure which uses remote access to video meaning you can connect to the internet or a 3G, from any desired location or device, including tablets or smartphones, and access your live network;Badly-lit homes and estates are likely to draw criminals; while well-lit areas will help deter thieves and make it easier for the CCTV cameras to record any intrusion or break-ins. Where possible, evaluate your lighting system before you pack up and leave for the holidays and ensure that remote controlled lighting is installed in order to programme lights to come on at night or remotely activate them via an online connection; andWhilst technology is constantly evolving, it hasn’t yet replaced the role of humans. So ask a family or neighbour to "keep an eye" on your property, be on the lookout for anything suspicious from fresh tyre marks through to a moved dustbin or a gate left ajar.

The Mercury