KwaZulu-Natal has welcomed more than 80 “Christmas babies”.

The provincial Health Department said on Tuesday that 47 boys and 40 girls had been born on December 25 at government facilities.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

National Health Department’s head of communications, Popo Maja, said that hundreds of babies had been delivered across the country.

Gauteng delivered 389 babies; Northern Cape, 52; Free State, 49; Eastern Cape, 189; and Limpopo, 173.

Maja said: “Three provinces are still outstanding (in terms of an update), but this will be sent out as soon as it is made available.”
Dad Byron Haffenden and mom Bianca Haffenden welcomed baby girl Emma Haffenden. Picture: Supplied


He also acknowledged the efforts of the country’s healthcare workers. “Special thanks go to the professionals serving in our public healthcare facilities. Almost 95% of babies born in South Africa annually are delivered in public health facilities,” said Maja.

KwaZulu-Natal Health MEC Dr Sibongiseni Dhlomo said on Christmas Day it was worrying that three of the mothers who gave birth at Murchison, Newcastle and Mahatma Gandhi hospitals were just 16 years old.

“We are always concerned when young people fall pregnant, because it is very unsafe. If you’re a young person under the age of 18, and you’re delivering a big baby, which does happen, chances of delivering safely are slim.

He also reiterated that all pregnant mothers should attend antenatal clinics according to schedule to ensure early detection of any potential health risks for themselves and their unborn babies.

He said that one of the mothers had never attended an antenatal clinic, and had therefore not been booked to deliver.
Life Westville Hospital’s registered nurse Thobe Mseleku checks on mom Nonhlanhla Hlela and baby girl Esethu Mndaweni. Picture: Supplied


Dhlomo and acting head of department, Dr Musa Gumede, handed over gifts – including baby clothes, nappies and blankets – to four mothers and their babies at King Edward VIII Hospital.

Meanwhile, private hospitals also enjoyed their fair share of Christmas bundles of joy.

Baby girl Emma Haffenden was born at 8.15am at Life Westville Hospital to parents Byron and Bianca Haffenden.

Nonhlanhla Hlela also gave birth to a little girl – Esethu Mndaweni – at the same hospital.

Life Crompton Hospital also helped proud parents Musa and Judy Simelane welcome their Christmas baby girl, who is yet to be named.

On Saturday, Netcare 911 paramedics helped deliver a little girl after mom Nombilo Mhlongo had gone into labour at an uMhlanga hotel.
Netcare 911 paramedics Joe Gopalsamy and Ebrahim Easthorpe congratulate Nombilo Mhlongo on the birth of her daughter. Picture: Supplied



The service’s emergency care practitioner, who responded to the scene, found the patient on the hotel room floor in an advanced stage of labour and immediately prepared for delivery.

“Once delivery had safely been completed, the baby girl and ecstatic mother were thoroughly assessed and found to be in good health,” said Netcare.
The Mercury