Police in Hilton are appealing for help in locating three suspects.
KZN police spokesperson Captain Nqobile Gwala said in a statement on Thursday that the men were wanted for various crimes.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Siphesihle Percival Mncwabe, 24, from Hilton College, Valley Compound was wanted for housebreaking with intent to steal, and theft.
Siphesihle Percival Mncwabe is wanted for housebreaking with intent to steal, and theft. Picture: SAPS

“He appeared in the Pietermaritzburg Magistrates’ Court and the charges were provisionally withdrawn due to the unavailability of the witness at that stage. On July 24, 2017, the summons was issued by the Pietermaritzburg Magistrates’ Court, warning the accused to appear before court in August 2017 but he failed (to show up).”
The second suspect, Nhlanhla Michael Jili, 47 – also known as Dlamini and from Dambuza Location, Pietermaritzburg – was caught by a shop owner at Hilton Village, stealing items from the business premises. 
Nhlanhla Michael Jili, 47 was caught by a shop owner at Hilton Village, stealing items from the business premises. Picture: SAPS

“The suspect was then arrested by Hilton police and where he was charged for theft. He appeared in the Pietermaritzburg Magistrates’ Court and was granted bail. On Friday June 22, 2017 the accused failed to appear (again) and his bail was revoked. 
The third suspect, Koshik Subha, 40, from Crest Place, Northdale was employed as a cashier in one of the business premises in Hilton, when it was discovered that he had been stealing money when he was cashing up. 
Koshik Subha was employed as a cashier in one of the business premises in Hilton, when it was discovered that he had been stealing money when he was cashing up. Picture: SAPS

“(He) confessed to his supervisor and promised to re-pay the money, which he never did. A case of theft was opened for further investigation.”


If you have any information on the whereabouts of these men, contact Detective Constable Thobani Nxele of Hilton SAPS on 072 108 1738 or 033 845 6520/1/5 or Crime Stop on 08600 10111.

The Mercury