In the midst of our southern summer of braaivleis and blue skies, there’s no point in South Africans dreaming of a white Christmas, but there’s a lot they can do to easily make their festive celebrations greener. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Faithful-to-Nature.co.za shared a curation of environmentally-friendly ideas with The Mercury.

Go with a Christmas tree that grows
Picture: Supplied

Whatever you do, don’t go buying a new fake plastic tree this season. They don’t last forever, and will inevitably end up in the landfill. Greenpop recommends buying a real tree that you can pot, and then plant out in your garden after the holiday season. Choose a water-wise, indigenous tree with a great shape such as the Water Berry tree. If you don’t have space in your garden to plant it out after Christmas, you can always donate it to a local school in the New Year and help them green their environment.
Wrap them up in inspiration
Picture: Supplied

Unwrapping presents brings us great joy at Christmas time, but the great heap of torn paper with layers of plastic tape that we clean up afterwards is a real downer. Zero waste advocate, Shannon Skye Goodman suggests getting everyone involved in creatively using more eco-friendly alternatives this year. Decorate brown paper and newspaper, and use spare boxes or pretty scraps of fabric.  
Mindful shopping for meaningful gifts
Picture: Supplied

In the Christmas rush, it’s easy to find yourself buying whatever is to hand for someone who has everything anyway. It pays to really spend some time thinking about what you can give your loved ones and friends that will delight them and won’t compromise your greener Christmas this year. Founder of Faithful-to-Nature.co.za, Robyn Smith points out that there is more choice than there has ever been when it comes to eco-friendly goods.  From luxury organic toiletries and chocolates to quality gadgets for the greener house and garden, you can far more easily find gift options that are better for the earth. 
Plan for feasting with zero food waste
Picture: Supplied

We get to the end of a long year and we naturally feel like indulging and being indulged over the holiday season. It’s the time for lots of social meals and festive treats which can surely lead to an excess in food. According to celebrity chef, Sarah Graham, just a little planning can go a long way to alleviating this. She recommends including a strategy for how to use the leftovers when you are planning your festive menus. You can conserve food and budget, as well as your own time and energy by intending to ‘cook once to eat twice’ every time you are preparing for a mealtime gathering. 
The Mercury