In an effort to bring some much-needed festive joy to its residents, The Association for the Aged (Tafta) launched its annual festive cheer box campaign, which allows their residents the joy of opening a gift at Christmas.
“As Christmas fast approaches, most people eagerly prepare to share a festive feast and gifts with their loved ones but, for the elderly of the city’s care facilities, these celebrations are not guaranteed,” said the organisation in a statement on Tuesday.
They said that each year hundreds of senior citizens in their care prepared to spend Christmas without their families and, instead they would rely on the company of staff and other residents for a sense of belonging. 
Tafta says that its annual festive cheer box campaign allows their residents the joy of opening a gift at Christmas. Photo by rawpixel on Unsplash
This was what prompted the association to launch its annual festive cheer box campaign which would see sponsors and donors provide essential toiletry items for the residents which would be “beautifully packaged” for the festive season.
“Something so modest may not seem like much to most people but to the elderly people who can barely recall the last time they felt wanted and appreciated it means the world,” said divisional manager for income development, marketing and public relations Gail Samuels. 
The organisation aims to provide more than 500 senior citizens with a cheer box this year, ensuring that nobody is left without opening a gift this Christmas. 
“This simple gesture means so much to our residents. It not only allows them to feel included and share in the joy of the season but is a reminder that they are being thought of and cared for. It is extremely rewarding to see the sheer joy that these initiatives bring,” said Samuels.

The association is asking for the following items:

Body lotion;Toothpaste;Toothbrushes;Face towels;Bath sponges;Shampoo;Soap;Powder;Ear buds;Vaseline;Body powder;Aqueous cream;Razors;Adult nappies;Tinned food;Instant cereal;Sugar;Tea;Coffee; andInstant soup


For further information contact Ateesha or Fatima on 031 332 3721 or ateesha@tafta.org.za
The Mercury
