Internationally renowned artist, visual activist Zanele Muholi opened her first solo exhibition on home soil entitled "Homecoming" in Durban’s Art Gallery on Friday.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Muholi, a gender rights activist born in eMlazi, has dedicated her life’s work to creating awareness around the lives of the LGBTI community and the exhibition focused on those bodily-, gender-, and sexuality-diverse people and communities, specifically those belonging to the black communities.

Speaking on opening night of the exhibition, Muholi explained that an exhibition like this was a step in the right direction and commended the eThekwini Municipality for giving the LGBTI community a platform to interact and showcase their work without prejudice and discrimination.

“For a number of years, the black LGBTI community has been sidelined, our talents are being stifled. This gallery and exhibition is telling of how times have changed, we have been given a platform to shine and to show our various skill and talents. We have been given a voice and this is a start of greater things,” she said.


Muholi has had numerous solo exhibitions, internationally, and "Homecoming" represents her and her visual art's literal homecoming. She has had solo exhibitions  at the Brooklyn Museum in New York (2015), open Eye Gallery, Liverpool (2015), FotoFocus Biennial, Cincinnati, USA (2016), Rencontres D’Arles (2016), Wentrup, Berlin, Germany (2017), Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam (2017) and Autograph ABP, London (2017).

Art-lovers and members of the LGBTI community came in their numbers to enjoy the night of art, song and poetry.

In closing, Muholi said she used visual art to celebrate and honour the men and women in the LGBTI community and urged others in the community to be vocal about their talents.


“It's time we start showing and telling the world positive life stories, about the love, intimacy and joy that we have and not just on the violence and dangers we face in our day to day lives.”



The week-long exhibition will end with a walkabout with the artist on Tuesday, December 5, and Wednesday December 6, 2017.