There is no doubt that Christmas is an expensive time of year for all. By the time the New Year ticks over most of us probably refuse point blank to look at our bank statements and dread the ‘January Blues’. But the festive season needn't be a drain and there are always ways to save money, says card service bsmart. Here's how:ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Make a shopping list
If you only buy what you need, shopping doesn’t have to be expensive. Create a shopping list with items that you need (i.e. a gift per person), instead of items that you want. This helps you avoid impulse purchases and keep track of your budget and the cost of each item. Make sure you establish a budget ahead of time.
Photo by Glenn Carstens-Peters on Unsplash


Secret Santa
Secret Santa doesn’t have to be just for the office. As a family you can decide on a budget that you are all comfortable spending and then each draw a name from a hat. 

Shop online
This is a great way to take advantage of a wide variety of great deals. Instead of trudging to every mall in your area in search of the perfect gift and at the right price, shop online and let your gifts come to you. 
Photo by rawpixel.com on Unsplash
Give gifts of service
This could include mowing the lawn for your elderly parents, helping around the house, running an errand for a friend or family member or cooking dinner for someone when you know they have been run off their feet and just need a bit of a break. 

Consider a cashback credit card
You can then save the rest of your budget for something that you really need or want. This could mean supplementing your holiday fund or helping to pay back any debt – the choice is up to you. 

Don’t overbuy food
We often think that Christmas is the time of year where we fling all our diets out the window and eat as much as we like. While this may be true (January You is going to hate this) we are often left with more food than we need and give large amounts of it away with departing Christmas guests. 

Start shopping now
There is no time like the present. Start shopping now so that you can spread out your budget over two or three salary months. This way, all purchases are quite manageable and don’t have you gasping for air at the end of the festive season.
Photo by Ali Yahya on Unsplash


Give homemade gifts
Never underestimate the power of a well-thought out and time-spent present. Sometimes the best gifts are the ones that remind you of each other and not by how much they cost.
Photo by rawpixel.com on Unsplash


Use voucher codes
When in doubt, go the coupon route. Often enough, if we do our homework, we can really make our Christmas budget work for us. Keep an eye out for potential deals and when they are happening and get more bargain for your buck. 

Share the cost of Christmas
If you are playing host this Christmas, why not inform everyone of what they can bring? Nine times out of ten, guests are just waiting for you to let them know what you need help with.
The Mercury