An annual reconciliation survey has found that most South Africans still felt a united SA was possible, despite the gap between the rich and the poor.
The Institute for Justice and Reconciliation released the latest South African Reconciliation Barometer (SARB) findings – just as South Africans readied themselves to celebrate the Day of Reconciliation at the weekend – in Cape Town this week.
The report found that 56.1% of South Africans agreed that South Africa had made progress in reconciliation since the end of apartheid. 
“The percentage of South Africans agreeing that a united South Africa is desirable in 2017 reached 75.3%. Optimism about the potential for a more unified society follows a similar trend to the desirability of greater unity. The majority of South Africans – 68% – believed in 2017 that it is possible to create a united South Africa,” said the body in a statement.
Fewer than half of South Africans reported that their friends and family had experienced reconciliation after the end of apartheid. 
“Seven in ten (73.5%) South Africans feel that South Africa still needs reconciliation, while 63.4% agree that reconciliation is impossible for as long as people who were disadvantaged under apartheid remain poor.”
Confidence in institutions in 2017 is the lowest it has been since 2006 in parliament, national government and provincial government. Photo by Arnaud Jaegers on Unsplash

The “gap between rich and poor” was furthermore ranked as the biggest source of division by respondents in 2017.
Processes of reconciliation need guidance and involvement of individuals, institutions and leadership. 
The report asked respondents whether they think the involvement of specific institutions is important for reconciliation.
"More than six in ten South Africans believe that the involvement of various institutions listed – business, religious and faith-based organisations and family, friends and individuals – is important."
The role of national government and elected representatives in reconciliation was also deemed important by most South Africans, trust in these institutions has decreased to the point of systemic erosion. 
READ: Reflect on the true meaning of reconciliation
“Confidence in institutions in 2017 is the lowest it has been since 2006 in parliament, national government and provincial government.”
The report’s data showed that confidence in the ANC at the time of surveying was also low – with only 33% of South Africans reporting that they had ‘a great deal’ or ‘quite a lot’ of confidence in the ANC, while 49.8% of South Africans reported they feel close to the ANC over a long period of time.
The main opposition parties expected to contend the 2019 national election include the DA and the EFF, in which 23.5% and 19.1% of South Africans have confidence respectively. 
“Importantly, 25,6% of South Africans do not feel close to any political party.”
The Mercury