Nearly 75% of all crashes on the N3 Toll Route are caused by human error. 
And this was why, said the N3 Toll Concession (N3TC) in a statement, it was going the “extra mile” to enhance overall route safety this December holiday.
Since inception, the body has instituted various road safety interventions and deploys extensive resources to enhance safety along the route which extends from Heidelberg in Gauteng to Cedara in KwaZulu-Natal.  
“We continuously improve road signage and markings, do speed over distance monitoring, enhance our road incident management capacity through on-going training, and the deployment of highly-specialised personnel and emergency response vehicles,” said Miles le Roux, N3TC’s transport engineer, in a statement.
The festive season, with its peak traffic volumes, can be a time of increased road crashes. In this recent accident in Peacevale, a bakkie overturned on the N3 Durban bound. Picture: ER24

He said that on a daily basis, their Route Control Centre diligently managed the very important N3 Incident Database which enabled them to identify hotspots along the route and gave a better understanding of the type of incidents, and how to manage and mitigate these.
Driver attitude and risk-taking continues, he said, to have a negative impact on road safety.
“Human error (deliberate or unintentional) remains the top cause of crashes and fatalities on the N3 Toll Route. Nearly 75% of vehicle crashes on the route are due to human error,” said le Roux.
Human factors include negligent driving behaviour such as illegal overtaking, tailgating, weaving across lanes, illegal turns, speeding, driver distractions, being aggressive and impatient on the road, violating traffic laws and other safety regulations.
Following human error, vehicle failure places lives at risk.
Authorities have warned motorists to drive with caution over the festive season. Picture: Netcare911

Expected peak traffic periods on the N3 Toll Route this festive season
The route may become heavily congested during the peak holiday season. Plan your trip well in advance and stay up-to-date with road and traffic conditions ahead. Set realistic targets, keeping in mind that you may be delayed.

Southbound (towards KwaZulu-Natal)
Friday, December 15 between 12pm and 10pm
Saturday, December 16 between 6am and 3pm
Sunday, December 17 between 6am and 3pm
Monday, December 18 from 6am to 3pm

North and Southbound
Friday, December 22 between 10am and 8pm
Saturday, December 23 between 6am and 3pm
Friday, December 29 between 12pm and 8pm

Northbound (towards Gauteng)
Tuesday, January 2 between 12pm and 10pm
Friday to Sunday, January 5 to 7 between 12pm and 10pm

Road construction
Road construction activities along the N3 Toll Route ceased from mid-December 2017 and will only resume during the second week of January 2018.
The Mercury
