Luxury-branded counterfeit goods – valued at more than R40 million – have been confiscated by SARS officials this month.
The services said in a statement that this week, over just two days, customs officials at OR Tambo International Airport (ORTIA) intercepted four consignments of suspected counterfeit goods with a combined protected value of R20.5 million. 
“These included 2 600 Nike sneakers which came from Hong Kong, 7 700 Nike sneakers, 100 Louis Vuitton bags, 2 000 Nike kids’ sneakers 470 Gucci ladies dresses and 1 600 ladies Polo and Chanel branded shoes all from China.”
They said that in another recent case, a 24-foot container filled with suspected counterfeit shoes, bags, wallets and other goods had also been detained by SARS Customs officials at the City Deep depot in Gauteng on December 8.
Some of the suspected counterfeit goods that were confiscated recently. Picture: SARS

“The goods, with a protected value of R20.7-million, were declared as furniture.”
Three weeks ago, they said, there had been a bust of suspected counterfeit clothing and footwear, with a street value of about R1.2-million, at Kosi Bay. 
They said that the import of second-hand clothing had become a growing trend over the past few years – supposedly as a donation or in transit to neighbouring countries. 
“However, these items end up being re-sold in various retail stores at reduced prices, thereby making it difficult for compliant traders and importers – who pay the correct taxes and customs duties – to compete,” said Patrick Moeng, executive at customs investigations. 
The destruction of second hand clothes in Midrand in November 2017. Picture: SARS

Legitimate donations were allowed as the charity organisations engaged with Customs beforehand and obtained applicable permits. 
“(But) the majority of these items are imported through the Durban port, then diverted to neighbouring countries and ultimately smuggled into South Africa. This is done to avoid paying the correct duties and taxes.” 
About a month ago, customs destroyed goods that arrived in 45 super link trucks at the Midrand dump site. 
The goods were thrown into a deep hole and sprayed with sulphuric acid for easy destruction.
The Mercury
