A suspected robber – later linked to other crimes – was apprehended by Metro Police officers after a foot chase spanning one kilometre on Wednesday.
The eThekwini Municipality said in a statement that the tireless efforts of Constable Manqoba Phewa and Constable Mandla Mthethwa who worked cohesively as a team – one on foot and the other following in the Metro Police van – had resulted in the arrest.
“They later learnt that the suspect was wanted by the South African Police Service for a host of other crimes.”
They had been returning to the Boscombe Joint Operations Centre at 5pm on Wednesday when they were alerted to the robbery. 
“They rushed to the scene where a man who was walking in the vicinity of Palmer and Gillespie streets had been accosted and robbed by three men, one who allegedly viciously bit him in the scuffle and left him bleeding.”
Phewa said in the statement that they had rushed to the scene but the gang of robbers had run off.
Constable Manqoba Phewa, on the left, with his partner Constable Mandla Mthethwa. Picture: Zamatungwa Gumede

“The victim told us what happened. While searching the area for men matching that description we were stopped by a known car guard in the area who had recovered the stolen cellphone. He also pointed us in the direction the men had run,” he said.
Mthethwa said that when they spotted the men, he jumped out of the van and started to chase them with Phewa following in the van. 
“Unfortunately two of the suspects got away.”
Mthethwa said: “I had to run quite fast to keep up with him but I was determined that he would not get away. If I had stopped we would have lost him as he would have run into a shop and removed his jacket and blended in with the crowd.”
After gaining ground on the suspect, Phewa pulled up in front of him with the Metro Police van, cutting him off.
“As we were loading the suspect into the van he showed us where he had thrown the wallet in an effort to bribe us but that didn’t work. We took him to the Point Police Station and were surprised to see his face on the wall as one of their wanted criminals. He had cases against him in 2015 and 2016,” said Mthethwa.
Mthethwa had also been instrumental in another previous arrest, which also involved a chase on foot.
“Two weeks ago he chased another robber on foot for over two kilometres through the Durban (city centre) and successfully caught him after he has stolen a woman’s cellphone.
Mthethwa said: “At the end of the day we are working here to protect the public. Robberies are on the increase as people are seen as soft targets. I am committed to fighting this and letting criminals know that we are on duty.”
The Mercury
