Although unforeseen accidents and illnesses are unavoidable, planning and preparation can ensure that they do not wreak havoc with your holiday.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
And, said Dr Rene Leitch of Netcare Alberlito Hospital’s emergency department, some of the most common illnesses or accidents that occurred on vacation could be managed with over the counter medicine, home remedies and items found in a standard first aid kit. 
"However, it is always wise to prepare for any eventuality in advance, for example to find out where the nearest hospital and medical centre to your holiday destination is situated in the case you or a family member may need expert care.”

Here are some of her tips:

Travellers’ diarrhoea or acute gastroenteritis
The vast majority of stomach infections are viral, which means that antibiotics are not needed to treat them. Often, symptoms can be managed with rest and oral rehydration solutions. You can also make your own, effective oral rehydration solution by mixing six teaspoons of sugar and half a teaspoon of salt with a litre of clean water. Over the counter medications for stomach cramps and diarrhoea can also provide some relief. 

Sunburn
Prevention is key and it is therefore best to avoid exposure to direct sunlight between 10am and 3pm, which is the time of day when UV rays are at their strongest. Wear protective clothing, including a wide-brimmed hat, and generously apply sunscreen with a high protection factor at least thirty minutes before going outside. Remember to reapply your sunscreen frequently, especially after swimming.
Photo by Jesse Schoff on Unsplash

Water safety
Always be very careful when around water and never overestimate your swimming ability. Be particularly vigilant around water if you have young children. Even the strongest swimmer can be swept away by a strong current or large wave. Be cautious when swimming in the sea, as there are many unpredictable currents and rips in the ocean, as well as sudden drops due to sandbanks forming beneath the water. Only swim in the designated areas marked by lifeguards, and never go swimming in the ocean at night.
Photo by Efe Kurnaz on Unsplash

 
Stings and bites
It is important to consult a travel health doctor or your family practitioner a few weeks before visiting a malaria area, as some malaria medication must be taken well before entering a malaria area. If you get bitten or stung by an insect or spider, clean the wound with a diluted antiseptic solution or apply antiseptic cream. Never scratch, prick, suck or cut the affected area, as this does not aid healing and may create a risk of infection. If you are known to have a severe allergy to bee stings, be sure to have your epinephrine auto-injector on hand at all times and inform your travelling companions of your allergy. In the case of snakebites, if left untreated, they can be life-threatening. It is therefore imperative to get to an emergency room as soon as possible to receive anti-venom when appropriate. It is always best to try give a description or photo of the snake that bit you so that the doctors will know what type of poison they are dealing with. 
The Mercury