The country’s top lifeguards, lifesavers and all-round athletes will be making some serious waves at this year’s Red Bull Beach Patrol contest taking place at Durban’s North Beach on Sunday.  The athletes will be pushed to their absolute limits as they compete against Durban’s best lifeguards - and the elements - in a series of swim, paddleboard and surfski disciplines.  Westville’s Luke Nisbet, 32, will be defending his title, having also placed in the top three of the first Red Bull Beach Patrol in 2015. Nisbet is on top form, finishing fifth in this year’s Pete Marlin Surfski Race and is currently battling it out in the Suncoast Pirates Wall and Back Surfski Series.Rorke, Odendaal win NZ beach sprint “I’ve been racing, so I think the surfski leg will be my strongest for Red Bull Beach Patrol,” said Nisbet, a Suncoast Pirates Surf Lifesaving Club member. “It’s such a good test of endurance because it’s a bit longer than the usual ironman. I also really enjoy how it incorporates the piers and finishes off with the run.” Other contenders include Wade Krieger, 35, from Durban Surf Lifesaving Club who came second in last year’s main race as well as the three qualifying races leading up to it. Krieger is also a three-time South African Ironman champion, three-time surf-swim champion, two-time Midmar Mile age group champion and a South African Board Champion.Action from last year's Red Bull Beach Patrol event. Picture: Supplied Verulam’s Mthembeni Mkhize, 32, from uMhlanga Rocks Surf Lifesaving Club, missed out on last year’s race because he was working, so he’s keen to put in a strong showing this year. “This year I’m looking to going as hard as I can. For training I’m running at the moment and doing a lot of cardio. I’m focusing on the paddleski and swimming, my worst leg of the race.” Mkhize has placed in the top three of several long-distance surfski paddle events as well as competing in numerous lifesaving championships countrywide. He holds the 2017 trophy for the uMhlanga Rocks Surf Lifesaving Club’s top surfski paddler as well as the 2015 “Most Improved Surfski Paddler” trophy for the Varsity College Surfski Challenge.Dream duo line up for 2018 Dusi The event’s Sportive Director, Barry Lewin, said he was excited to watch these truly South African heroes showing their skill in this uniquely-designed, spectator-friendly course. “I feel that the sea will be the biggest factor on the day, testing the athletes’ endurance and spirit. At the end of the day, Durban’s North Beach is going to decide who is worthy for the championship place.” The Red Bull Beach Patrol is open to any willing participants, although a fair level of athleticism in the arenas of swimming, paddleboarding and surski is required to make it through the qualifying rounds. To enter, visit www.redbull.co.za/beachpatrolEntries close on December 6·