A K9 unit, recently established by Project Rhino to stop wildlife crime, has been at work in the Zululand district of KwaZulu-Natal, locating carcasses of critically endangered white-backed vultures. 
Vultures are regularly poisoned for illegal use in the traditional medicine market, with population numbers plummeting in recent years. Carcasses were located near the town of Hluhluwe.




 
Project Rhino, an association of like-minded organisations established in 2011 that facilitates rhino conservation interventions, has launched a specialised wildlife crime dog unit to support KwaZulu-Natal game reserves, they said via their Facebook pages and on their website. In just three weeks, the unit has been present at SAPS roadblocks, reserve vehicle checks and night patrols.
READ: KZN loses 218 rhinos in 2017 – so far
“Dogs have proved an essential tool to fight wildlife crime by tracking down poachers, detecting wildlife products and recovering illegal weapons and ammunition. Project Rhino has been working towards implementing a dog unit that will service the needs of reserves, functioning effectively within the unique Zululand landscape. We hope to grow the team, using trained and certified tracking dogs to assist in tracking and locating suspects as well as gathering important intelligence,” said Chris Galliers, the Project Rhino co-ordinator.
Two white-backed vultures settle in for the night in a dead tree just after sunset in the Kruger National Park. Picture: Armand Hough

Mali, a three year old Malinois (Belgian Shepherd), is the certified detection dog who works with his qualified handler who has over 26 years experience in conservation law enforcement. Together, they are highly effective in searching suspects, crime scenes, buildings, vehicles and outdoor locations.
WATCH: Conservation group calls for the de-horning of rhino
“In my experience, dogs are very useful, especially in areas where people cannot see tracks from poachers. Dogs at the gates are also very helpful for detecting ammunition and rhino horn,” said Musa Mbatha, assistant reserve manager at Phinda Private Game Reserve.
They said: “Under the Project Rhino K9 Unit, in partnership with WESSA Lowveld, operating exclusively in Hluhluwe/iMfolozi Park, is another dog unit. This unit, consisting of five dogs, each performing a specific function, has had some significant successes in the past year.”
KZN’s rhinos are under fire with at least 218 killed in the province’s reserves this year already. This toll is 37 more than last year, despite beefed up wildlife crime prevention efforts and the introduction of new technology to fight and track poachers.

See the Project Rhino Facebook page for info on how to contribute to the funding of this project, or if you would like to assist with veterinary supplies or dog food.

