Durban Ethekwini Municipality has prescribed strict conditions for contractors wishing to do business with the city to ensure economic benefits for local communities.The conditions centre on the recent announcement by the municipality that contractors in the construction industry should share work with local communities. Addressing a business summit on radical economic transformation on Wednesday morning, eThekwini mayor Zandile Gumede said the matter was a non-negotiable priority.The municipality has said every project with a contract value above R30 million shall set aside 30% of the project for CPG s (Community Participation Groups). And projects between R5m and R30m must stipulate that 30% of the project value will be allocated to sub-contractors. The detailed conditions include that sub-contractors or service providers shall be selected from the wards where the service or project is being undertaken. And if the project traverses a number of wards, opportunities shall be granted to all subcontractors in the benefiting wards. In cases where there are no suitable contractors to do the job in a ward, the main contractor shall select sub-contractors from the relevant municipal wards database of service providers. Alternatively, sub-contractors could be nominated by the municipality after a thorough screening process. The main contractor is expected to provide training for the sub-contractors. The training and coaching shall enable the subcontractor to apply for higher CIDB (Construction Industry Development Board) grading after the completion of the project or register with the appropriate professional or monitoring body, she said. The main contractor will take full professional responsibility for the workmanship quality of the subcontractors he or she chooses. She warned that the days of one contractor monopolising even non-technical jobs were over. There are jobs that are not technical like the cleaning of gutters and sweeping the streets. These jobs should be spread among many people. She said that co-operatives could also be formed to take on jobs like the cleaning of the city buildings and that the city wanted to create jobs. Ethekwini has about 30 soup kitchens.&quot; It does not make sense that one person should be paid a lot of money to supply bread.&quot; Why can t we develop a bakery? Gumede also announced the activation of Team Durban, a committee which will advise her on business development matters. Zandile Sithole, deputy head of municipal supply chain management, warned that companies that failed to comply with the conditions would be fined or disqualified. Dumile Cele, the chief executive of the Durban Chamber of Commerce and Industry, said the announcement of work sharing was a positive step as big businesses within the chamber were always looking for smaller companies to partner with on projects. Gumede was also given a thumbs-up for the plan by delegates who attended the meeting.They urged her to push the officials to ensure that the recommendations are implemented, with one delegate calling for it to be part of their performance agreements. [email&#160;protected]The Mercury