Durban With at least 139 unlicensed firearms recovered in KwaZulu-Natal in the first month of the year, it appears the province is on its way to becoming the gun capital of South Africa again. Police spokesperson Colonel Thembeka Mbele said the firearms were recovered in various operations in the province between January 1 and 28. They included 119 pistols , four shotguns, six home-made firearms and 10 rifles.More than 1400 rounds of ammunition were recovered and 151 people arrested for possession of unlicensed firearms and ammunition.According to the 2015/2016 national crime statistics, of the 14 772 cases of illegal possession of firearms and ammunition, 3 908 were registered at KZN police stations. Although this was almost 200 less than the previous year it was still more than other provinces. There were 3 600 in Gauteng and 2 819 in the Western Cape.Most cases -115 were opened at the Msinga, in the Mvoti district. This was the ninth highest in the countryKZN violence monitor Mary de Haas believes the weapons floating around KZN are a result of the political violence of the late 1980s and early 1990s.Some of the &nbsp;unlicensed firearms recovered in intelligence- driven operations around KZN so far this year. Picture: Independent Media There were caches of guns brought into the province. Many are unaccounted for. Police reported on various intelligence-driven operations last month where unlicensed firearms were recovered.These included two R5 assault rifles that were seized at Dalton near Greytown. According to the South African Gun Owners Association, fully automatic firearms are issued only to the military, the police and a specific category of collectors.Police also recovered two .303 rifles, a .38 special revolver and a 9mm pistol.One of the three suspects arrested was a s19 years old. In separate operations, two pump-action shotguns and a .303 rifle were recovered at Nhlanhleni, near Pomeroy.At Osizweni, four people were arrested for possession of three unlicensed 9mm pistols. Three more 9mm pistols were found by Durban public order police, leading to the arrest of three suspects. While attending to a domestic violence complaint in Phoenix, police recovered 12 firearms a rifle, shotguns and pistols concealed in the ceiling of a home. De Haas said guns contributed to the high crime rate. Someone who commits a hijacking, home invasion, or murder is more likely to be armed with a gun, she said. A .303 rifle recovered by police in Sundumbili was sent for ballistic tests to establish if it was used in the faction fights and taxi-related cases in that area.In the northern town of Mahlabathini, two 9mm pistols were seized, their serial numbers filed off. The police believe they came from the KwaMashu Hostel.Hostel killings and taxi violence had become almost synonymous with the province, De Haas said, and these were fuelled by firearms floating around .Although she applauded the arrests, she said they were not enough. Where are these guns coming from?&quot; We can t keep treating the symptom and ignoring the cause. Gun Association chairperson advocate John Welsh said the licensing requirements were strict enough. But people did not take the right to own a gun with the responsibility that went with it to ensure it did not end up in the wrong hands. The Mercury