Durban The family of mother and son artists, formerly of Durban, who were shot dead in the US last week would not be drawn into commenting on whether the alleged killer, another family member, should face the death penalty if found guilty. Thirty-five-year-old Arlyn Pillay and his mother, Lulu (Gloria), 58, were allegedly murdered by her oldest son, Nolan, 37, last Wednesday. The family lived in Reservoir Hills before they left for California 15 years ago.A relative told The Mercury on Sunday that funeral arrangements are yet to be made.Nolan appeared in court last Thursday, and the charges could see him face the death penalty, The Mercury s sister paper, The Sunday Tribune, reported.Lulu owned the Lady Lulu gallery in Palm Springs, and Arlyn the Arlyn Pillay Art Gallery in Tustin, both in California. Arlyn also ran an online collectables shop called Ogre Shop.Friends and associates of the pair are taking care of their operations for the time being. An online crowdfunding account was set up to help fund the pair s funerals and to keep their galleries open. By Sunday, just over $5000 (R66 000) had been raised. Friends and colleagues of Arlyn had also held tribute events at his gallery over the past week to raise money to keep the gallery afloat. These included drawing sessions and live music. Nolan is facing a death sentence after being accused of killing his brother and mother.Durban businesswoman Rosanne Narandas, who is Lulu s niece, told The Mercury on Sunday that Nolan potentially facing the death penalty is certainly the furthest thing from our minds at the moment . We have not discussed this at all. Nolan is also our family and we feel for him as much as we feel for those we have lost. She added: As we have no details on what happened, we cannot judge or condemn. Narandas said the family had not decided at this stage whether the funeral service would be held in Durban or in the US. She said a sister of Lulu s husband, Anand, had gone to California and would inform the family of any decisions made. If the funerals are held in the US, then our family in South Africa will definitely hold a memorial service here, Narandas said. Eva Mikhailovna, whose band, Eva and the Vagabond Tales, performed at one of the fundraising and memorial events, told The Mercury that Arlyn and Lulu were remembered by the arts community as kind people. They supported the art community, and there were always a variety of age groups visiting the gallery and learning. He (Arlyn) was bright and colourful to be around and very pleasant. Members of their local art fraternity hailed the pair on social media. Arlyn was an incredibly talented and prolific artist, Abe Lopez wrote. Art drove him and he was more than willing to share with others. Louie Solano wrote: (They were) filled with a unique passion for creativity and spreading a loving spirit. Arlyn inspired me daily since the moment I first met him. Jake Luce posted: We are all better people and artists after spending even a single moment in your (Arlyn and Lulu s) presence. The Mercury