Durban A family murder, in which four people were killed including an 11-year-old child, has rocked the Richmond community in the KwaZulu-Natal Midlands.Speaking to The Mercury on Sunday, Quinton Dawood, said his grandmother Cecelia Chiliza, 60, uncle Dumisani Chiliza, 35, cousin Nkosikhona Masango, 27, and his 11-year-old niece Noxolo Dawood had all been killed by gunmen who had stormed their rondavel and opened fire.Dawood, who was not at home when the shooting occurred, said his 7-year-old son had been unharmed and had been found hiding under his bed after the gunmen had left.Masango s 4-year-old child had also hid under a duvet in the house and had only been slightly injured. He said both children appeared unharmed but would start crying if they were questioned about the shooting. Dawood said he was struggling to come to terms with the mass murder and he did not know why anyone would want to harm his family. Police spokesperson Colonel Thembeka Mbele said the shooting happened late on Saturday night. Seven people were holding a Zulu cultural ceremony called Iladi when the door to their rondavel was kicked down and shots were fired, she said.The motive for the attack was unknown and four cases of murder and three of attempted murder had been opened at Richmond police station, Mbele said. She said the survivors were unable to say how many attackers there were, as they were attempting to hide in a bid to save their lives. She said 9mm cartridges were recovered from the scene by police.The attackers then fled and a woman sought help after hearing a car driving off.The ANC in KZN said in a statement on Sunday that it was taken aback by the number of mass killings occurring in the province. The continuation of senseless killings of our people in the province is of great concern and needs a different approach from the law enforcement agencies. The ANC appealed to the police to double their efforts in the investigation and asked the community of Richmond to remain calm. We have deployed our Moses Mabhida Regional leadership to engage with communities and be of help to the family of the victims. We are conveying a heartfelt message of condolences to the family, community, and neighbours of the victims.&quot; The ANC will work with all community structures to address the root cause of such incidents, read the statement. Meanwhile, in a separate unrelated incident in Matimatolo near Greytown, three cousins were ambushed on the way from a traditional ceremony and shot dead. Colonel Mbele said two of them were 38, and the other was 20 years old. Iladi is a Zulu cultural ceremony held to remember the dead.The Mercury