Durban The five people accused of trafficking more than 70 textile workers for labour exploitation were denied bail on Monday. The four Chinese and one Swazi national, who are between the ages of 18 and 35, appeared in the Newcastle Magistrate s Court.They were arrested in a raid at a Newcastle textile factory by the Hawks earlier this month.In total, 72 workers from Swaziland, Lesotho and Mozambique, who had been living and working in the factory, were rescued and are currently living in places of safety in Pinetown, Ladysmith and Dundee. The raid came after two recent recruits from Swaziland blew the whistle on conditions in the factory and the docking of their salaries, apparently to pay for their accommodation. Department of Labour inspectors, who were also at the raid, found unhygienic living conditions which were in violation of health codes. Labour laws were also flouted.Wander Mkhonza, secretary-general of the Amalgamated Trade Union of Swaziland, applauded the court s decision to deny the accused bail. This would serve as a deterrent to other employers who see Swazi workers as tools that can be used at will,&quot; he said. &quot;Our desperation for a better life does not give anyone the licence to abuse us; we are also human beings. But desperation meant the slave-like conditions in these factories were the lesser evil in some cases, he said. People also go there to be free and independent.&quot;&quot;They prefer living in a country where people s rights are respected and where they won t be bound by the conservative nature of Swaziland, said Mkhonza. The Southern African Clothing and Textile Workers Union also welcomed the court s decision.The union s senior researcher, Simon Eppel, said they hoped authorities would pursue the matter to its conclusion.According to the Department of Home Affairs, most of the workers had valid visitor permits but these did not allow them to work in South Africa. Natasha Kara, provincial spokesperson for the National Prosecuting Authority, said the accused three women and two men were due back in court on March 29. The Mercury