Durban - Just a stone s throw from President Jacob Zuma s Nkandla homestead, more than 50 families whose mud houses were destroyed by lightning hope for proper homes. A thunderstorm hit the area two weeks ago and lightning caused such severe damage to the structures that residents had to flee their homes. Some residents were injured during the incident.Some have tried to rebuild their mud houses but the elderly are too frail to do so.Ntombikazi Cebekhulu, 81, was among those whose home was destroyed.Siboneni Shezi outside a home that was destroyed by the bad weather in Nkandla a few weeks ago. Photo: Mlondolozi Mbolo She narrowly escaped death when her room caved in just seconds after she managed to escape.Her house was destroyed and she moved in with her son, Phathokwakhe, 56, in a rondavel next door. Cebekhulu sat barefoot on the floor of the hut as she recounted the nerve-wracking experience. I would have died if I had stayed a few more minutes in that house. I don t know from where I got the legs to run. I felt something pushing me out of the door from behind. I thank my ancestors for protecting me. I m having sleepless nights. I m really scared because I don t know what would have happened if I was asleep that night. It was the first time I experienced something like this in my life. Cebekhulu, who was born and raised in Nkandla, said she would have rebuilt her house if her health was good. But I don t have the strength any more. I don t like begging and relying on other people, I m used to doing things myself. Photo: Mlondolozi Mbolo Phathokwakhe, who is ill, said they were still in shock. I have never seen anything like that in my life. Everything just happened so fast. I heard a heavy thunderstorm and then my mother came running into my room. When I went outside to check, her house collapsed right in front of me. If she had delayed getting out of the house, I think we would be telling a different story today. Phathokwakhe said they were happy to have a president who was from the Nkandla but would be happier if it made a difference to their lives. Ngoneni Luthuli, 50, a single mother of seven, is trying to rebuild her partially collapsed, two-room mud house. Her 6-year-old daughter, Lethokuhle, stood beside her, her dress splashed with mud as her mother plastered the walls. The scorching heat didn t deter Luthuli from taking on the energy-sapping task. Her other daughter, Thandinkosi, 16, was struck by lightning, leaving the back of her left arm bruised.Photo: Mlondolozi Mbolo We were eating and I suddenly heard my daughter cry. I didn t notice that she was struck by lightning even though I saw lightning come through the window. I grabbed Thandinkosi and covered her in my arms. I was prepared to die with my daughter at that stage. She just lay there motionless. Despite the harrowing experience, Thandinkosi went to school the following day. Luthuli said she was struggling to make ends meet. Her only means of survival was part-time jobs from which she eked out a living. At the most I get R600 a month. I don t want much; just a proper house so that my children are safe. I will be glad if the government heard our cry. While building her house, Luthuli and her children live in a cramped room made of corrugated iron. She said her children were taking it badly. When clouds gather my children tell me that we must get inside the house because we are going to be hit by a thunderstorm. I can tell that they are traumatised. Photo: Mlondolozi Mbolo Last year, Siboneni Shezi, 56, was knocked down by a car and sustained serious leg injuries. The driver fled the scene. And now, the house she called home has been destroyed. I m battling to understand the bad luck. I don t know what to do. She, like the other victims, hoped Zuma, would flex his muscle and take them out of their misery.Nkandla was won by the IFP during local elections last year.The Mercury