Durban Heavy rainfalls have left much of the town of Newcastle under water and a number of local families without roofs over their heads.The Ncandu and Ngagane rivers burst their banks on Tuesday night, flooding surrounding homes and businesses.Police search and rescue teams pulled 17 people from their homes on Tuesday night and at least seven more were rescued on Wednesday morning.Newcastle Municipality mayor Makhosini Nkosi told The Mercury that about 22 homes had been damaged. The flooded areas included Suryaville, Paradise, Fairleigh, Madadeni and Blaaubosch, Nkosi said.The taxi rank, nearby stores and residential homes near the town were completely swamped. There were no casualties, he said.Amcor Dam overflowed and flooded the nearby bridge. Nkosi said some of those affected were accommodated at community halls, while others were taken in by family and friends.The rain had also affected electricity supplies, he said. The electricity department personnel are trying to ascertain the source of the problem in order to fix it. Heavy rain also fell on the province s North Coast on Tuesday and on Wednesday , flooding roads and bridges. A bakkie was washed into the uThongathi (Tongaat) River on Wednesday . IPSS Medical Rescue s Paul Herbst said the vehicle was trying to cross a low-level bridge and the driver had been fortunate to escape without injury.A man was fighting for his life on Wednesday after a crash on the N2 southbound, just before Umdloti.Herbst said the man had been travelling northbound when his vehicle rolled several times. IPSS Medical rescue advanced life-support paramedics found the driver lying alongside his SUV with life-threatening injuries, Herbst said.The injured man was placed on a ventilator before being taken to hospital, he said.Spokesperson for Emergency Medical Services in KZN, Robert McKenzie, said that on Tuesday night four people were injured when a house collapsed on Beatrice Street, KwaDukuza. Around midnight, a four-&shy;bedroom informal dwelling in KwaDukuza collapsed, leaving four people seriously injured, he said.Paramedics from the Department of Health s EMS responded and treated two adults and two children who were injured when debris from the structure landed on them. They were stabilised at the scene before being taken to a nearby hospital.According to South African Weather Service forecaster Julius Mahlangu, Durban received 74.2mm of rain between Sunday night and on Wednesday morning. Richards Bay received a whopping 111.8mm on Tuesday night.KZN Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs spokesperson Lennox Mabaso said on Wednesday that disaster management teams were responding to incidents in the province.The department had intervened in Newcastle, where parts of town had been barricaded from an overflowing river, Mabaso said. At uMhlabuyalingana and in Maphumulo, the department has been assisting residents trapped on impassable dirt roads, he said.The Mercury