Durban Two more KwaZulu-Natal districts have been confirmed to have crop-destroying armyworm infestations. But Agriculture and Rural Development MEC Themba Mthembu said farmers in the province had nothing to worry about, as this was under control. Speaking at a press conference in Durban on Tuesday, Mthembu was joined by head of department Dr Siphiwe Mkhize and chief director, soil science, Nomfuzo Mkhize. This pest is a fast traveller and cannot be contained in one specific area, said Mthembu. At the weekend, armyworms were positively identified in the uThukela and uMkhanyakude districts. At the press conference two days later, Mthembu announced the pests presence in maize farms in Amajuba and Zululand districts. Despite this, Mthembu gave the assurance that a spread of the infestation had been checked. The department has put up an emergency plant pest response plan which is already in motion. As part of mitigating this scourge, the department will solicit resources for control such as procurement of agrochemicals and traps. Armyworm is new to South Africa but is indigenous to South and Central America and the southern part of the US. This means there are no registered chemicals to treat infestations locally. Since it was confirmed in South Africa, initially in Limpopo and the North West Province, the Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (DAFF) has had to speedily register chemicals. At present, the department has pesticide products which are approved for use in controlling the armyworm in the maize and other crops vulnerable to it, said Mthembu. However, he warned farmers to use only these registered pesticides products approved in terms of the Fertilizer, Farm Feeds, Agricultural Remedies and Stock Remedies Act. These were now available for sale to individual farmers, but Mthembu said part of their emergency plan was to promote integrated pest management. The plan included conducting awareness and education. The Department is working closely with DAFF and farmers to determine other hosts affected.&quot; A creation of a database to co-ordinate other provinces is being considered, said Mthembu. For prevention, an interim control programme aimed at assisting farmers with a proper guide for pesticides usage as an emergency measure is being done . Mthembu said this would be communicated and made available on the department s website and the provincial department s website.The MEC called on commercial and subsistence farmers to be vigilant and to report suspected armyworm detection to local and districts of the department for immediate quarantine and intervention.The Mercury