Durban - A Durban police officer killed in the line of duty on Tuesday night was a man dedicated to looking after his family. Constable Thomas Khwela, 37, died while responding to a robbery in progress at a garage on Edwin Swales Drive.Provincial police spokesperson Thulani Zwane said Khwela had been on a crime prevention operation with his Brighton Beach colleagues when the incident occurred. They were alerted to a robbery in progress at a nearby garage. When the members approached the garage, the suspects ran out and the police gave chase. &quot;While chasing them, the officer was shot and killed, said Zwane.Khwela's, brother Khumbulani Khwela, said the family had been informed of his death around 11pm on Tuesday and battled to come to grips with what had happened.Khumbulani said Khwela was the breadwinner and was the youngest in a family of five.He said Khwela had always worried about his family. His care for the family comes from growing up in difficult circumstances. &quot;The news of his death came as a shock to the whole of our community. He said his mother, who was ill, had been devastated by Khwela s death.Khumbulani said Khwela, who he described as a introvert, had begun his career in the South African National Defence Force and had joined the police service six years ago.Zwane said that one suspected robber from the group had been arrested and would be charged with robbery and murder. He said the police had found a 9mm pistol, which they suspected belonged to one of the suspects, at the scene. The police were looking for the other suspects who were still at large. The rest of the gang fled the scene with cigarettes and cash from the garage.Acting provincial police commissioner Bheki Langa on Wednesday condemned the murder. Those who kill our police officers are the worst of the worst. &quot;They made the biggest mistake of their lives by attacking members of the law enforcement fraternity, Langa said. &nbsp;Khumbulani said the family were still making arrangement for the funeral and no date had been set. Khwela is survived by his mother and four siblings.The Mercury