A specialised unit of the Department of Economic Development, Tourism and Environmental Affairs is on a campaign to clean up the acts of businesses operating in KwaZulu-Natal and came in for some nasty surprises this week.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
The unit – Consumer Protection Services – carried out inspections in Durban, issuing a R3 000 fine to one business for its “unhygienic actions”.
The motor industry and retailers – or those selling fast moving consumer goods (FMCG) – were targeted by two teams of inspectors.
At one of the premises – a bakery in Isipingo – there was evidence of a rat infestation, as well as cobwebs.
Staff members were also washing up and showering in the vicinity of the baking area, and were not using gloves while preparing the food.
The baking equipment was also found to be in poor condition and the environment was not adequately temperature controlled.
“The conditions were terrible and could have made customers very sick,” said spokesperson for the department Bongani Tembe.
The business would be receiving guidance from the department so that it might resume operations.
“The last thing we want to do is shut businesses down permanently because we are trying to grow the economy.”
Tembe told The Mercury on Thursday that the unit had joined forces with other enforcement agencies, including the municipality, to curb illegal practices.
“Many of these businesses do not comply with the Consumer Protection Act, and some are even unlicensed.”
Confiscate
The unit also monitored informal businesses.
“For example, there are many who sell fish from their vehicles. The fish sits in the car all day without being properly refrigerated. People who buy this fish run the risk of falling ill after eating it.”
In these cases, it was common to confiscate the items and destroy them.
He said many businesses employed foreigners who were in the country illegally. Some workers in shops even slept there. Expired food, some going back to last year, was also found.
“These businesses have been operating with impunity, so drastic steps need to be taken.” He said the financial sector would also be strictly monitored.
“There are many offering ‘financial services’ but are loan sharks. They confiscate people's identification documents and bank cards.”
Tembe said they embarked on the campaign recently, launching it in Nquthu, but were intensifying the drive across the province, particularly in Durban. “These issues have far-reaching implications for health and safety. Strict and regular monitoring is crucial.”
He said consumers also needed to know their rights.
“Some consumers don't read the labels, or complain if there is a problem.”
Similar joint inspections were carried out in March when surprise visits were conducted at stores in Durban. Underpaid workers, non-compliance with employment standards and expired food were some of the transgressions found.
At the time, expired baby food was found on the shelves of one of the stores inspected, and officials found that the same store was selling radios and amplifiers illegally, as they were not certified by the Independent Communications Authority of South Africa.
Rat and cockroach droppings were also found.
The Mercury