For the owner of three pizza franchises in Umlazi Mega City, Kwa-Mnyandu Mall and Philani Valley Mall, becoming a successful businessman was not an easy journey.With money always tight when he was growing up, Muzi Shinga pledged to work harder towards fulfilling his dream of owning a business and building a bright future for his family.Looking back, he believes the hardships he had to endure before reaching this stage on his entrepreneurial journey were necessary for his growth.The father of four - two boys and two girls - lit up as he told the story of how the entrepreneurial seed was sown when his father came home one day with a packet of sweets. Instead of enjoying the sweets himself, Shinga decided to sell them to children at his school.While still at school, Shinga started a small-scale poultry business on a small and purchased his first van to assist with deliveries. He was helped by his parents, David and Margaret Ntombi Shinga, who were unemployed at the time. Members of his community and surrounding communities became his primary clientele and occasionally supported him with large orders.However, the business had to take a back seat when he focused on getting good results in his matric year at Sibongimfundo High School.He then left his home in uMzumbe, Kwa-Ndelu Village, on Durban’s South Coast, to pursue further studies in computer programming, which left his fledgling business unattended.When Shinga found himself without money to register for his second year of study, his parents told him he needed to find a way to support himself. At this point he took up a delivery job as a van assistant with Steers Holdings and often volunteered to assist with admin duties.His work with Steers Holdings gave him the advantage of getting to know the business inside out. He then worked part-time for Debonairs Westville as a pizza-delivery driver. Themba Mhlungu, the manager of one of the outlets, was influential in Shinga's success, having provided hiim with the mentorship he required. He said Mhlungu saw an opportunity for establishing a franchise business in his community and there were talks about Umlazi Mega City Mall. When Shinga first submitted an application to open a Debonairs franchise he was rejected and told “black people don’t eat pizza”. On his way home, he recalls seeing a woman in a taxi carrying a box of pizza. He took a picture of her and that is how he was given the green light to open a franchise.“Ithala Mega City employees were my regular customers and I used to personally deliver pizzas there when I opened my first franchise. When it was time for me to expand my business operations I didn’t hesitate to knock on their doors.“I was desperate and wanted to buy a business partner out, as the partnership wasn’t working. I also saw a gap to expand and opened another franchise in Philani Valley,” he said.”Although the process for Ithala Development Finance Corporation to approve his loan application took some time, he believes it was worth the wait.Ithala’s Business Finance Executive, Bonginkosi Shangase, said: “The franchise sector remains buoyant and Ithala recognises the potential to promote franchise-business development, particularly in the townships and rural areas of the province.” “Today I can afford to put my children, those of relatives and other children from my community back home through the best schools. Some of them are now graduates and have a chance at earning a decent living,” said Shinga, who employs 56 people.When asked if he thought there was enough support for the youth wanting to start up their own businesses he quickly responded: “Yes, absolutely. The problem with the youth is that they expect everything to be handed on a silver platter.” “In order for someone else to believe in your dream you need to believe in yourself. Don’t wait for someone to bail you out while you are sitting at home - take charge of the situation.” Shinga, 41, divides his time between uMzumbe, Kwa-Ndelu, where his family lives, and his property in Athlone Park in Amanzimtoti to be closer to his businesses.  He was a finalist in Ithala’s 2017 Business Achiever Awards.