A group of uMvoti farmers has reached out to their Eastern Cape counterparts devastated by wild fires in the region last month.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Farmers and agri-businesses from the area near Greytown had donated over 1 000 bales of animal feed to farmers from Thornhill in the Eastern Cape who were among those who suffered huge losses after the fires swept through parts of the Eastern and Western Cape, claiming lives, razing homes and devastating much of the land, said the farmers in a statement this week.
After hearing about the desperate plight of these fellow farmers, uMvoti farmer and chairman of the uMvoti Agricultural Society (UAS), Dean Brown, appealed to members for donations of animal feed.
“Within a few hours, five truckloads of animal feed had been donated by three locally-based agricultural companies: Pidelta, Golden Grown and Moo2u. 
And within a couple of days, a further 15 truckloads of animal feed had been donated by local farmers including Sutton Farming, Barber Farming, CJ & DC Odendaal Farming, RBJ Farming, Steve Stamp, LA Hill, Gunter Kohne, Rueben Surrendorff and Lloyd Robertson, he said.
The first two truckloads of feed left the area at the end of June with the remaining truckloads to be delivered at intervals throughout July. 
“Afgri Animal Feeds has also played a pivotal role in sponsoring the transport of the feed, along with Puttergill Farming, situated in Thornhill, which is the central point for delivery and distribution of the animal feed to those farmers in need.”
Brown said: “Farmers in uMvoti are known for their community spirit, especially during tough times, but the level of generosity and compassion our members have shown has blown me away and I couldn’t be more proud of the amazing spirit that this farming community has to offer.”
Thornhill farmer, Grant Puttergill, who is co-ordinating the distribution of the animal feed on behalf of the Thornhill Farmers’ Association expressed his heartfelt thanks for the donations.
“These fires have devastated the lives and livelihoods of our members. 
Some of us have lost everything. Our situation is desperate and there are no words to express how thankful we are to the farmers for extending the hand of kindness to us down here in the Eastern Cape. It is a rare example of how selfless people can be and for that, we are extremely grateful,” he said.
Chief executive of the KZN Agricultural Union Kwanalu Sandy La Marque said the union was proud of the efforts of organisation, and their members who were so willing to give in such tough times.
“The kindness shown by farmers in KZN to help those in need is never short of inspiring and we commend the farmers for going above and beyond to support their fellow farmers in a neighbouring province,” said La Marque.”
The Mercury