DURBAN - GAGASI FM’s Kings of the Drive show were the first  to broadcast at the station’s new satellite studio at Ushaka Marine World, which was unveiled on Friday.
The duo of DJ Sphectacula and Naves, who are known as the Kings of the Weekend, joined the station in June and have won the hearts of many in KwaZulu-Natal.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The Kings of the Weekend left Metro FM to keep the party alive with Gagasi FM’s afternoon drive.

“We are in an environment where everyone is excited about us and we just want to do great work,” said Sphectacula, whose real name is Siphesihle Ngwenya.

“I like that the recent numbers of how we are doing on air have just come 
out and the station is continuing to deliver. That is really motivating. 

“The team is enthusiastic and willing to work together to put a great product on air. Our listeners are enthusiastic about calling in and we interact with them even on WhatsApp,” said the Durban-born entertainer.

Sphectacula and his other half, the Johannesburg-born DJ Naves, whose real name is Lebogang Naves, have become inseparable since working together at Metro FM where they hosted a weekend show. 
NEW host of the Kings of the Drive on Gagasi FM, Sphectacula and Naves. PICTURES: NQOBILE MBONAMBI
Naves said the move had been great and had encouraged  him learn isiZulu.

“We brought our own characters, entertainment, features, ideas and our way of thinking to the show, it’s been good. Staying in KZN is an experience on its own. It’s been great learning isiZulu. 

“I am from Soweto where people speak various languages; even those who speak isiZulu are not fluent in it. It’s only here in KZN where I learn to understand and speak it properly. 

“My favourite word is isiminyaminya (congestion) and I like the girls here, they call me baba (baby boy),” said Naves.

Ambition

Their move to Gagasi FM was prompted by personal growth ambitions.

“If you are on radio, you get paid per hour and at Metro FM we were there for two hours. There is more income this side but that’s not our focus, we had to pro and con everything. The biggest thing for us was more  on-air time; we wanted to grow as DJs. 

“We are not that young anymore, running around from gig to gig is not really amazing for us because we have been doing it for many years. 

“Our minds are on growing the radio space and I think that’s why we are having such a great time,” said Sphectacula.

The pair also own businesses together and recently released a new song titled Crazy, which features DJ Tira.
SUNDAY TRIBUNE