eThekwini mayor Zandile Gumede and her predecessor James Nxumalo could be called before the Moerane Commission to testify on the alleged misconduct of municipal officials and councillors during their tenures.
The commission, which is investigating the root causes of  political violence in KwaZulu-Natal, held a five-day sitting in Durban this week where witnesses testified about the alleged criminal conduct of the city’s anti-land invasion unit and councillors being the masterminds behind murders committed in KwaNdengezi, Inchanga and Glebelands.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Nxumalo, who is the SACP provincial chair, would be expected to share his perspective on the political violence in Inchanga, where he lives.

Commission secretary Solo Mdledle said it had not contacted Gumede or Nxumalo, adding an invitation would be sent to the municipality.

“We need to give people and organisations an opportunity to respond to the allegations made against them and also shed clarity on some of the issues. For example, with Glebelands you recall there were certain allegations made against the municipality in the public protector’s report so we need to give them an opportunity to respond,” he said.

In her report, “Stop the Carnage” which was released in October, former public protector advocate Thuli Madonsela, found eThekwini and the police failed to act in a manner that could have prevented more deaths at Glebelands. 

The commission has made the police aware that a senior official would need to testify on numerous allegations.

Gumede’s spokesperson Mthunzi Gumede said he could not comment on allegations made by witnesses  before the commission.

He said the mayor would seek legal advice on how to respond once the invitation had been received. 

“We fully support the work of the commission and we hope it will help bring back stability in the province and stop the political violence, because it’s affecting service delivery.”

Social scientist Professor Paulos Zulu, as well as religious leaders Reverend Sonto Thusi and Mxolisi Nyuswa, said the violence would not stop if politicians continued to see deployment to government as job opportunities rather than a platform to serve the communities that voted them into power.

“There is a culture of 
eliminating the competition in KwaZulu-Natal. 

“It’s not just in politics but in the taxi industry as well. 

“People are fighting over positions as councillors because there is no minimum qualification for the job.

“If you are the loudest in rallies and gatherings, you get the job,” Zulu said.

He added that the perpetrators were protected by those higher up the political ladder because it served their interest to remove the competition.

“I’m not saying the order to eliminate the competition comes from higher up, but the protection does, whether it is directly or indirectly, and that’s why the police cannot do their jobs effectively,” he added.

On Friday, commission chairperson advocate Marumo Moerane, with commissioners advocate Vasu Gounden and professor Cheryl Potgieter, visited Glebelands to speak to the residents. They also walked around the hostel to assess the living conditions. 

“Every year we get highly respected people coming and reports are released, but we are still sleeping with one eye open because people are still being killed, so we are not holding our breath with this commission,” said Innocent Jali.

Jali told the commissioners how he had allegedly been beaten by police for no reason.

“We have repeatedly asked the municipality to take over the administration of the hostel because it’s now a gold mine for opportunists and criminals. We are being made to pay money to fund the war that’s killing us,” said Bheki Sinama, who limps after being shot in the ankle three weeks ago.

The residents alleged that uMlazi SAPS was colluding with the criminals and those who did not play along were brutalised or had fraudulent charges brought against them. 

“Our politicians only care about what is making headlines that day. Almost 100 people have been killed here in the past 24 months, and we keep saying they must remove uMlazi SAPS and bring a unit from another area, but no one is listening,” Sphamandla Ngcobo said.

Marumo Moerane assured them that the commission would look into all the issues they raised.

The next hearing is scheduled for August 16 in Durban. 

nokuthula.ntuli@inl.coza
Sunday Tribune