THE eThekwini Municipality has rented out dozens of towers in neighbourhoods across the metro to cell provider MTN, the company confirmed on Friday.&nbsp; For months the city has given vague answers to residents concerned about the towers. MTN said it had embarked on a major network upgrade in eThekwini over the past 18 months, piggybacking on the city s infrastructure.&nbsp;Rent would be paid to the city for the use of the municipal poles, installed by the eThekwini disaster management and emergency control unit.This comes months after the eThekwini Municipality and MTN refused to provide clarity on the full description and scope of the project, which has had residents fuming at the sudden installation of cellphone towers in their suburbs.Critics complained there had been no consultation about the location of the towers or clear explanation about what they would be used for. Demand for improved speed and connectivity is increasing in tandem with the trends around social media streaming and downloading movies over various platforms. The requirement for more 4G/LTE capacity is therefore required as we strive to enhance the lives of even more people that rely on our services on a daily basis, said Giovanni Chiarelli, chief technology and information officer at MTN SA, on Friday.With the increased demand for data capacity, MTN said they had entered into an infrastructure-sharing agreement with the council. The infrastructure-sharing agreement began in 2010 and is no different to other sharing agreements MTN and other third parties have with one another to share infrastructure. The aim is to alleviate the need for more structures in close proximity to one another, which then becomes unsightly, said Chiarelli. This agreement, said head of eThekwini s disaster management and emergency control unit, Vincent Ngubane, was not unique to MTN. In fact, the city has or has had similar agreements with other telecommunications providers, he said, explaining in the joint statement that the city was rolling out its CCTV network which included the installation of more camera poles.As the two entities had similar objectives, said Chiarelli, it made sense to share the infrastructure. eThekwini municipality has the camera poles on their land and manages the entire process. MTN, in turn, uses these poles to install their equipment. Additionally, MTN in some instances placed their equipment on the camera poles prior to eThekwini disaster management installing their CCTV cameras. This was due to eThekwini disaster management not having stock of the CCTV cameras, said Chiarelli.This, he believed, was the reason that led to the unfortunate incorrect perception residents had that the towers were only for cellular functions. The rental income, said MTN, would be of good use to the city. The financial reward assists eThekwini disaster management with expenses, rolling out and the operating cost of having a CCTV system. MTN, which takes its role as a good corporate citizen very seriously, has followed the guidance of the municipality in deploying its network infrastructure on these camera poles. Placing the highest priority on quality, its equipment is all Icasa-approved.&nbsp; Furthermore, MTN follows World Health Organisation standards and is guided by the International Commission on Non-Ionising Radiation Protection with regard to electromotive force. MTN has an independent company that audits all of its installations to meet these standards, said Chiarelli.Why no public consultation was carried out, or why no public information sessions were held, has still not been answered by the municipality. When The Independent on Saturday requested confirmation of MTN s facts, and how much rent was being paid per pole to the city, publications manager at the city,Gugu Sisilana, said: The allegations contained in your e-mail will be referred to the relevant unit for investigation. Bid for info However, DA councillor on the emergency services committee Shaun Ryley said he would ask the council for answers and why no public consultation had taken place. Hi recent request for the full council to discuss the towers was turned down. The speaker rejected my questions on a technicality. He should have allowed the questions for the sake of an open government. We will get to the bottom of this whole saga. There is information that the public needs to know and we will make sure it is brought to light. Our next move is to lodge a PAIA, but we need answers on this as a matter of urgency, said Ryley.He will meet the disaster management and emergency control unit on Monday regarding the project.Most recently, Glenwood resident Andre van Rooyen, who said his house was raided by the SAPS for a case they were investigating involving damage to the telecommunications equipment, said he had heard nothing from the police since. THE INDEPENDENT ON SATURDAY