Bull Valley may have been the first horse to cross the finish line at the Mercury Sprint, but the real winners of the day were the children who stand to enjoy a fantastic holiday at the coast in the care of The Mercury Hibberdene Home. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
The annual event, held at Greyville Racecourse on Saturday, raised almost R80 000 for the South Coast home which provides underprivileged children with seaside holidays they would otherwise never have the opportunity to experience. 
Yogas Nair,  The Mercury editor and chairperson of the Hibberdene Home board, thanked Gold Circle Racing for its partnership that drives the event. 
She honoured her predecessor Phillida Ellis, who had been the head of the board for three decades. She showed appreciation to the rest of the board members and house mother Charmaine Barnwell, who runs the home, praising them for going above and beyond for the children. 
Barnwell said with the money raised, they would buy one big item as they did every year, and use the balance for day-to-day items required for their upcoming holiday camp and day out. 
This week, the home will welcome 120 children from poor families for an environmental camp. As part of their Mandela Day commemorations, they will take 120 other children to Wild Coast Sun Wild Waves Water Park, sponsored by Wild Coast Sun and FNB. 
All the items raffled and auctioned at the Mercury Sprint were also generously sponsored. 
Of the 10 races of the day, three were sponsored by eThekwini Hospital, Land Rover Durban and Hollywood Bets. Fairmont Zimbali also sponsored the main prize for the fun-filled day at the races. 
“It was an amazing day, the atmosphere was fantastic and people really gave generously. We can’t thank them enough for helping with much needed funds for the home. It helps us give children an amazing holiday they would otherwise never afford; it really is an amazing experience for them,” said Barnwell.
If you would like to make a donation to The Mercury Hibberdene Children’s Home, please contact Independent Media Community projects. Call Molehe Molosioa  on 031 308 2431 or e-mail:  molehe.molosioa@inl.co.za
The Mercury