Facebook has more adherents than any religion in the world, with the exception of Christianity - which it's poised to overtake in just a few years. This week the world’s dominant social network reached the 2 billion user milestone.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
It took almost 2 years for Facebook to capture another billion users to make the Social network a 2 billion powerhouse. On each of these occasions the founder of Facebook Mark Zuckerberg had something to say about the billion user milestone.
 
27 JUNE 2017
On reaching the second billion he had this to say (27 June 2017) : “As of this morning, the Facebook community is now officially 2 billion people!We're making progress connecting the world, and now let's bring the world closer together. It's an honor to be on this journey with you.”
 
Even more impressive than the sheer size is the speed with which Facebook brought a quarter of humanity into its fold. The network claimed its first billion users in 2012, just eight years after its inception. Adding another billion took fewer than five years. By contrast, roughly 200,000 years elapsed between the appearance of the first modern humans and our 1 billion population milestone, which we hit around 1820. The quickest we've ever added another billion to our population happened between 2000 and 2012, when we went from 6 billion to 7 billion in 12 years.
 
Recall that Facebook just pulled this off in under five.
Facebook defines active users as people who visited the site or its messaging app through their desktop computer or mobile app in the past 30 days. For obvious privacy reasons, it does not make its user data public, so it's impossible to independently verify the company's user counts.
 
Any service growing that quickly is bound to experience some mishaps - recall that the tagline for "The Social Network," the 2010 movie about Facebook's rise, was "You don't get to 500 million friends without making a few enemies." In recent months, Facebook has come under criticism for, among other things, suppressing conservative viewpoints, enabling suicide and murder, killing journalism, making people unhealthy and destroying Democracy as we know it.
Caught up in the din of daily Facebook controversies, it's easy to forget that none of us -- not even Facebook -- have any idea what it truly means to have a quarter of humanity plugged into a single product, governed by a single set of rules and norms, uploading deeply personal information to a single database, making a single company the gateway between ourselves and the advertisers who want us to buy stuff.
We just go with it, riding the tide of likes and shares into whatever Facebook's future holds for us.

WASHINGTON POST