Thirty students from around KwaZulu-Natal jetted off to India on Tuesday to start their tertiary education, thanks to the Indian government. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
The students are recipients of the African Scholarship Scheme from the Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR), the cultural arm of the Ministry of External Affairs.
The annually awarded scholarships have been given to South Africans since 1994. 
A farewell ceremony for some of the students at the King Shaka High School in uMlazi recently was attended by Consul-General of India Dr Shashank Vikram.
Former King Shaka pupil Nondumiso Luthuli thanked him and the Indian government for making the  scholarship possible, allowing her to realise her dream of working in the tourism industry. 
“I’m going to study a Bachelor of business administration in tourism and hospitality mnanagement. 
“After three years, I will get to do an internship in India, I can’t wait,” she said.
After failing a year, and dropping out of school following the death of her mother, the 21 year old said she thought all her hard work to complete her high school would come to nought. 
“I was accepted at two universities here but I did not get a response for my financial aid application. 
“I thought that was the end of the road education-wise for me, until I heard about this scholarship. 
It has literally changed my life,” she said. 
Luthuli is looking forward to interacting with local students and leaning on them and other recipients of the scholarship for support. 
“I know it’s a different country but being from Durban, I don’t think there will be too much of a culture shock.”. 
Every year, the ICCR offer 52 slots to South Africans for pursuing undergraduate, postgraduate, PhD and post-doctoral studies in the fields of engineering, arts, IT, commerce, science, pharmacy, accountancy, business administration, dance, music, hospitality and management.  
According to the office of the Consul-General in Durban, the funding scheme was based on the premise that “the best contribution that we can give to our fellow developing  countries is our growth experience and to share our technical expertise since issues facing the developing countries all across the world are more or less similar.”
Another scholarship recipient, Andile Mdlalose, 22, said completing a world class qualification in computer science in India would not only make a difference to his life, but to that of his mother and seven siblings. 
“I’m excited to get there and work hard. When I finish the four-year degree and find work, I will build my mother a house. 
“This scholarship is giving me the opportunity to get her out of a mud house.”
The Mercury