The 2017 edition of the Wavescape Festival at DIFF brings a new open-air venue, and 19 free surf and ocean films from around the world, with a bumper component of home-grown African movies.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
The festival moves to a new venue this year: Arena 5, Village Walk, uShaka Marine for five days from Monday to Friday (July 17 to 21). 
Screenings take place once a day at 7.30pm, which gives people time to finish work or get off the beach, have supper, and enjoy the latest films from around the world. 
Director of Wavescape Steve Pike said that Durban audiences were in for a treat this year. 
“Of the 19 films we’re screening, no less than 10 are from South Africa, our highest ratio yet and testimony to the skills and talents of local filmmakers. What’s more, all shows are totally free.”
“We just want to remind everyone about our venue change at the Village Walk. Come through and enjoy the vibe and the films. We’re also giving away thousands of rands worth of surf clothing and accessories, so it’ll be worth your while.”

 For a look at the schedule, trailers and synopses of the films, click here. Find out more on Facebook 

Some of the films on offer:
 
DISTANCE BETWEEN DREAMS
Hawaii, 2017, 62min
Director: Rob Bruce
This high voltage HD adventure comes courtesy of Red Bull Media House. It tells the story of the biggest big wave surfing season through the eyes of iconic surfer Ian Walsh, and his brothers, as they push surfing to unimaginable heights. Forget the jet ski, these athletes want to paddle giant waves at Jaws. Epic first person perspectives, state-of-the-art cinematography, and captivating sound.


 



 
SOUTH TO SIAN
Indonesia, 2016, 53min
Director: Dustin Humphrey
In this Dues Ex Machina film, two mates pack their hipster quiver of boards, two bikes and a $50 tent into or on a 70s Land Rover. Spraying black volcanic sand from their boneys or crystalline ocean drops from their boards, they connect with friends as they venture from southern Bali to Sumatra’s Lagundri Bay to find out if the pioneering spirit of surf adventure remains alive. You decide. 



 



WOMEN & THE WAVES 2
California, 2016, 43min
Director: Heather Hudson
Director Heather Hudson follows on from the first Women and Waves film with another crafted look at the state of surfing today from a feminine perspective. She documents the story of six women who celebrate life in life-affirming ways, with none of that “I can’t do it” attitude. This one is for the sister sliders of the surfing soul.


 


 
THE ACCORD
Iceland, 2016, 18min
Director: RC Cone
Growing up as a surfer in Iceland depends on an often volatile relationship with the mythical North Wind (played by a very funny drunk actor). The surfer is played by an ever-hopeful funny youngster with an unpronounceable name (Heiðar Logi Elíasson). Our surfer makes a deal, the Accord. Here, there are no surf shops, guidebooks or webcams.

 

 AGAINST THE CURRENT
South Africa, 2016, 24min
Director: Kayleigh Tuck, Aphile-Aphile Sololo and Sebastian Burger
Meet Zulu surfer girl Samukelisiwe Cele who grapples with her circumstances, family pressures and the need to be a typical teenager as she eyes a career in surfing. As the first and only black female competing in South Africa, this is a the story of someone who must face the difficulties of being one of a kind in a competitive and sometimes alienating sporting world.

 The Mercury