South Africans travelling overseas are often asked if wild animals roam the country’s streets.

Well, while this question is often met with derision and rolling eyes on the part of locals, there is at least one place in KwaZulu-Natal where these sightings are a regular occurrence.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Just a few days ago, said KwaZulu-Natal wildlife protection body iSimangaliso in a statement at the weekend, St Lucia resident Larina Joubert caught a photo of an elusive leopard on the town’s streets, which she shared on Facebook.

Hippos, crocodiles and various species are also often spotted.

iSimangaliso’s chief executive Andrew Zaloumis said that from time to time hyena roamed under cover of darkness, their calls frequently punctuating the night.

“And while leopard are less frequently seen, their presence is well known. These are just a few of the varied animals that one may freely spot without even entering the gates of the park.”

He said the area’s “magnificent wildlife” was one of the greatest draw cards to the Lake St Lucia Estuary section of the World Heritage Site.”

“There are few towns in the world with such a combination of warm ocean, golden beaches and prolific birds and wild animals peacefully cohabiting with human residents and visitors. It is truly iconic.”

 But, he said, with a predominantly international visitor population, especially at this time of year, as well as animals seeking their natural food close to human habitation in the leaner winter months, they reminded visitors to be very vigilant when walking in town or in the forested areas to avoid any negative encounters. 

“Wild animals have lived here since time immemorial. They remain wild and are potentially dangerous defending their territory and young. The rule of thumb is to give them as wide a berth as possible, whether on foot or in a vehicle.

Be especially aware of hippo and if you must walk in town at night, use a powerful torch. Do not at any time be tempted to enter the estuary water. It is the crocodile you can’t see that poses the greatest risk.”

The area, entirely surrounded by the World Heritage Site’s dense vegetation, was home to red duiker, bushbuck, mongoose, crocodiles, vervet monkeys, waterbuck and a myriad of bird species.

“Hippos are a nightly, and often daily, sight on the verges, gardens and streets of the popular holiday destination.”

Any potentially dangerous or unlawful situations, snares, feeding of wildlife or provocation of animals should be reported to the park’s 24-hour emergency line: 082 7977 944.
The Mercury