On September 15, The Independent on Saturday (TIOS) first asked the city for comment. TIOS: Glenwood residents are expressing concern about a number of tall poles/masts on street corners, namely ZK Matthews/Albert Dhlomo, Lena Ahrens/Deodar and Rick Turner/ZK Matthews. Some residents think it is a city project to put CCTV in the area while some think they are cell masts being erected. &nbsp;Please could eThekwini clarify what this construction project is about perhaps it is bringing more data capability to the area, CCTV cameras to combat crime (or both)? Are similar projects being rolled out in other suburbs? What is the value of the project? Has MTN/Huawei paid to use the municipal land that these masts are being erected on. If so will Glenwood residents benefit in any way?eThekwini response: eThekwini municipality has embarked on a city-wide CCTV project which will include licence-plate recognition cameras. This project is in line with the municipal-integrated development programme which includes creating a safe city as well as the new Smart City Objective. The city has established relations with many response agencies and private sector organisations.&nbsp;The objective was to reduce crime in various parts of the city as well as to have coverage of parts of the city where high levels of crime have been reported. The project also encompasses the replacement of ageing steel poles with concrete poles which are less maintenance. Through private and public partnerships new concrete poles have been introduced to improve smart city visibility as the city is moving towards wireless cameras that will increase visibility and serve as a back-up if fibre cable is stolen or damaged. Each site that is categorised as a priority area is identified through crime statistics from the SAPS, various community police forums, the metro police unit, Urban Management Zone Unit and other security stakeholders. These cameras are monitored 24 hours, 365 days a year. Similar questions were posed to MTN and its response was to refer the queries to the city.&nbsp;Various articles have been written since by other media outlets, and the city s response and that of MTN remain unchanged. On May 26, we questioned the city on the possibility of a secret deal between it and MTN.&nbsp;Its response was: The allegations contained in your email are quite serious. We will refer them to the relevant unit for investigation. On May 30, we followed up the query asking the city to comment on which department would be investigating the allegations and a time frame for a response. &nbsp;The city replied: Can you please send us the details and addresses of the complainants. We will forward their details to the relevant unit who will investigate the legitimacy of the allegations. We prefer to address the matter directly with the concerned parties THE INDEPENDENT ON SATURDAY