Durban - The DA’s spokesperson on health says she will escalate the forced removal of herself and a colleague from a Durban hospital to the National Assembly, saying it was a violation of the legislative mandate of Members of Parliament. 
Member of Parliament, Patricia Kopane, attempted to conduct oversight visits at Addington and Inkosi Albert Luthuli hospitals’ oncology departments following a South African Human Rights Commission finding that the rights of cancer patients, in KwaZulu-Natal, had been violated. 
“As the DA, we are going to take steps and make sure that these people are held accountable,” said Kopane. 
Addressing the media after being removed from Addington by security, DA KZN health spokesperson, Dr Imran Keeka, said they had followed the usual process and, as a courtesy, had informed the department of their visit. 
“But upon arrival at this facility we were told that we would be denied access. Armed guards prevented us from entering the oncology unit and we were removed from the facility,” he said. 
Keeka said KZN Health MEC Sibongiseni Dhlomo had himself taken responsibility for revoking their right to access, during a telephone conversation at the hospital’s management office. 
Kopane phoned Dhlomo who said, as a politician, Kopane should have discussed the visit with him. “Protocols of the National Assembly will apply to you too. We have multi-party visits to institutions, not one member waking up to do that. I discussed this thoroughly on Monday with the Minister (Dr Aaron Motsoaledi) and I am satisfied that we are doing the right thing,” said Dhlomo. 
Kopane replied that MPs and MPLs did not need permission to do their jobs. She said it was their responsibility to do oversight and that is what they were paid for, but Dhlomo did not budge. 
Following the DA alerting the media to their planned oversight visit on Sunday, the department also issued a media statement addressed to MPs, MPLs and councillors on hospital oversight visits. 
In it, Dhlomo said these should follow national Parliament prescripts, be arranged and organised through the portfolio committee, and the committee should deliberate on the purpose and sections to be visited, and how the visit should be structured.  
He said oversight is indeed a constitutional mandate but “members of political parties know that they cannot just show up at a hospital or clinic and purport to be there for oversight reasons”.
George Devenish, a retired professor of public law, who was one of the drafters of the interim constitution, said he was disappointed at the denial.  
“Public representatives are entitled to conduct oversight visits, it’s their duty and function in terms of the law. As far as I am concerned, asking for permission is just a courtesy, so it is most unsatisfactory, unfortunate and of concern that access was denied when we know there are problems (at the facility).”
Non-governmental organisation Parliamentary Monitoring Group (PMG), said according to its reading of Parliament’s own Oversight and Accountability Model, individual MPs are empowered to carry out independent oversight visits as part of their oversight work. The model states that, “Amid the multifaceted and multidimensional work of Members of Parliament lies the role of members to effect individual oversight...Each party represented in Parliament is allocated funds to develop its own method of constituent outreach…”
The model warns that in exercising their oversight role, members must take care not to encroach on the jurisdiction of provincial and local political representatives but rather adhere to the principles of co-operative government.
The Mercury