Members of the water sports clubs in the city's Point precinct will vote on a lease agreement with landowner, the Durban Point Development Company (DPDC) this month – a month before they are expected to vacate their premises as construction is expected to begin. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Members of the Durban Ski Boat Club were initially requested to decide whether they support the proposal to sign the leases by today. However, club commodore Hilton Kidger yesterday said this could not be done as it was in contradiction to their constitution. 
“Typically, a lease is presented, members are invited for comment, and we take them to the DPDC. 
"Modifications are made to those leases and they come back to be approved, or not, by the members through a democratic process.”
That is what they intended to do by calling a general meeting later this month. 
Voting will also be conducted at the other affected clubs, namely the Durban Undersea Club (DUC), the Durban Ski Boat Club and the Point Yacht Club, as well as the Durban Paddle Ski Club (DPSC). 
Part of the issues for consideration outlined in communication to ski boat club members was pursuing the purchase option legally. It was feared that this would leave the club vulnerable to immediate eviction, be costly and, should the club lose in court, it would have to pay the DPDC’s legal costs. There was also a concern that the temporary lease would be off the table, and the club would effectively have nowhere to go. 
Points also up for discussion were how the transition to the temporary site would be managed, with the club needing to keep its doors open to fund the running costs. 
“We have come to an arrangement that will allow the DUC to first move its 'transferable equipment' into the temporary premises, and get that operation up and running, but at the same time we will keep the ski boat club fully operational.”
Once at the temporary site, the launching of boats will not be interrupted and the club will be allowed to set up container-type accommodation for staff, diesel storage, workshops and staff toilets. 
Regarding members' concern that the planned two-year stay in temporary premises could be extended due to unforeseen problems, it was stated that “We were given  assurance that this was a private tender without city procurement protocol, and that they would be complete within two years.”
DUC chairperson Cuane Hall was unwilling to comment. 
Johnny Vassilaros, chairperson of the Save Vetches Association, said there was still a lot of uncertainty due to the contradictions. 
“We have not seen any plans. They are planning to start construction in a few weeks, yet no one has been shown any plans,” he said. 
He said they had written to the DPDC voicing their concerns. 
The company refused to  comment.
The Mercury