The nine-day long SA Open Chess Tournament was held in Durban for the first time in 21 years, finishing this past weekend.The third largest tournament on the SA Chess Calendar, this year it attracted more than 500 participants. The prizegiving, attended by luminaries in the SA Chess structures including acting president, Winston Dalport, and the vice president Joe Mahomole, was held on Saturday evening, July 22, in the Glenwood High School hall. Championship Section winner, Grand Master from Delhi, India Sahaj Grover, walked away with prize money of more than R20 000. Grover also won the Beier Blitz section and the SupaMama Rapid section. Various other international players won the top prizes. The best performing South African was Watu Kobese from Cape Town, winning 8 of 11 in the Championship section. Kobese is the defending SA Champion and is an International Master from Soweto.  Whereas the KZN Department of Sports and Recreation was the main sponsor of the event, the Beier Group of Companies stepped in at the last minute to be the main corporate sponsor. It also brought in strategic partners to assist. Hans Beier and Grand Master from Dheli, Saraj Grover. The company has been involved in chess development for more than eight years, with a permanent schools programme in under-resourced schools. “We focus on schools in the KwaDabeka and KwaSanti areas, outside Pinetown. These are feeder areas for the Pinetown based group of companies,” said Mbongeni Sithole, co-ordinator for the programme.“We believe that the cognitive skills learned from playing chess, as well as the characteristics of patience, determination, focus, creativity and problem solving are key elements to success in work and in life,” said Hans Beier, who founded the Beier Chess in Schools programme in 2007.The best performing development player entered into the competition was Grade 11 pupil, Sizwe Ndlovu  who was placed second in the B Section of the competition. Ndlovu , captain of Sithokozile Secondary School chess side, beat more than 130 other players in that section.