IN THE spirit of teaching boys to become men, high-profile businessmen and radio personalities engaged with pupils from five schools at the Gandhi-Luthuli Peace Hall, Denis Hurley Centre, where they held an interactive motivational session with young men.
On Saturday, at the event hosted by Finance Minister Malusi Gigaba’s wife, Norma, and her foundation, boys were urged to be resilient in their quest to build healthy communities.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

Vivian Reddy and Black Business Council vice-president Sandile Zungu attended the event.   

Gigaba said the focus was on boys because she felt that they were neglected. “We cannot fold our arms and watch them ruining opportunities of creating a better society. Men are called all sorts of names, more recently #MenAreTrash. 

“It is wrong. We should be building them up, not breaking their souls and the values they have in their hearts. Not all men are trash. Such programmes will help transit new changes for a healthy society.” 

Her mentorship programme was titled “campfire”. 

Reddy called on the youth to take a stand. “Do not be afraid to stand up. Ask those tough questions, be confident. Be the shining light in your communities by also avoiding bad publicity. Be the vehicle for change. Do not bow to peer pressure. Concentrate on your studies. Do not let anything stand in your way. Success does not come cheap,” Reddy said. 

Zungu, who grew up in uMlazi, said young men should be positive and prepare themselves for a brighter future. He urged them to avoid bad influences in their neighbourhoods.

“For you to succeed and emerge in your communities, avoid the wrong crowd who want to tarnish your good standing in the community. To be successful means you should have principles and a strong will to succeed.” 

Gagasi FM presenter Alex Mthiyane said: “These days you can choose your career without being influenced by others because information is now at your fingertips, unlike before where there were limited careers to choose from.” 

Among the guests were popular 5FM DJ Euphonik (Themba Nkosi) and young scientist Siya Xuza, founder and managing director of Galactic Energy Ventures.  

 nkululeko.nene@inl.co.za
SUNDAY TRIBUNE