Durban pensioners are up in arms over changes to the city s rates policy which will see many of them facing higher rates bills. Some pensioners, who previously qualified for senior citizens rates rebates may lose out due to a review of the rates policy.Previously the rates policy stated that pensioners qualified for the rates rebate if they were owners over 60 years, permanently resided on the property, were South African citizens, had a rebate on only one property and that the property was valued under R3 million.However, the city has changed the threshold to state that the property value must not exceed R2m as determined by the municipal valuation.Some pensioners, who contacted The Mercury, said they received SMS notifications last week informing them their rebates application had been rejected.&nbsp;They have argued that while their property value had increased their income remained fixed and others took issue with the manner in which they were informed. I am an 83-year-old and on June 29 I received an SMS from the municipality which stated: Dear Ratepayer, Your rebate for 2017/2018 has been REJECTED (their capitals) as your property value exceeds the R2 million limit approved by the council. Not the courtesy of a written letter or even an e-mail just an electronic SMS! said one pensioner.&nbsp;He said this was high handed, autocratic and typical of the way the council does things.&nbsp; The council has obviously decided, with no consultation or agreement by the ratepayers, to reduce the ceiling for the rebate from R3m to R2m, when in these times of economic stress, I would have thought that the limit should actually have been raised, he said.He said he was concerned about how much money he might be expected to pay. We have lost the subsidy of R336, to make that up we might have to cut back on groceries. &nbsp;Elaine van Schoor from Somerset Valley near Durban North said she had been getting the rebate for the past few years.&nbsp; This is an attack on all pensioners, we want our subsidies back. Otherwise we cannot cope or survive this as we are pensioners and we survive on a fixed income, she said, The value of my house was R1.6m, this increased to R2.4m, I was getting a discount of around R366 per month and I am already paying over R1 000 a month. With the subsidy being taken away, I might have to pay close to R1 a500 a month, I cannot afford that. DA councillor Heinz de Boer said they had objected to the changes and his party decided not to vote for the budget which was voted the same time as the rates policy review changes.He said the changes mean pensioners will be paying between R250 and R300 or more per month on top of their current rates.&nbsp;De Boer said they were looking to fight the changes and are in the early stages of exploring ways to have that policy reviewed through council.&nbsp; The problem is that many people are house rich but cash poor. This policy will affect hundreds of pensioners and I have received many complaints, it s a huge problem. &nbsp;He said there had been a blanket increase on property values. In his ward there was at least one case where the property had increased by more than R1m.In a statement, the city s head of revenue, Peet Du Plessis said as of July 1 rates rebates for senior citizen &nbsp;property owners had been revised and the threshold for pensioners who own property is capped at R2m of their property value.&nbsp; The review and change was implemented under the guidance of National Treasury due to eThekwini having had the highest indigent package in the country.&nbsp; This was amended after consultation with stakeholders through the budget process and has also helped to target the correct households. EThekwini Municipality has a debt relief programme whereby residents are encouraged to approach the municipality if they are in arrears. 