Traders at the Stables Lifestyle Market – which is on land in Durban earmarked for a football academy – remain  defiant in the face of impending eviction.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Tashya Giyapersad, attorney for Glen Eden Trading 31 CC, which manages the market housing almost 150 informal traders at the Newmarket Stables, held a press briefing on Thursday to confirm that her clients were continuing the court battle with eThekwini Municipality to remain where they are. 
The tenants, as reported by The Mercury earlier this year, were to be moved to make way for a R300 million international sports development centre, with a football academy to be built in the Kings Park precinct by Hoy Park Management (Pty) Ltd.
They maintained in their court papers – in a story published in The Sunday Tribune in February – that they had a valid 30-year lease with the municipality.
In the same report, Giyapersad said her clients were lawful occupants of their premises, and the city had sought to evict them without fair warning or proper notice. Such action, she said at the time, would be to the detriment of more than 22 000 local and international people who visited the market monthly, and hundreds of workers.
In support of its eviction, the city said in previous court documents that its lease with the tenants had ended in May 2010, and they had not been paying rent since.
But Giyapersad suggested this week that something was fishy about the evictions. “Hoy Park Management Pty Ltd is most certainly linked to certain individuals at the eThekwini Municipality… This tender is a ‘private treaty’. The municipality still has to explain its actions but is doing everything to avoid explaining itself. It is hiding behind litigation,” she said yesterday.
Applications such as this one have been brought by the city against other tenants occupying land earmarked for the sports academy.
Newmarket Stables Equestrian Club also said in court papers filed at the Durban High Court earlier this year that if it was evicted, their employees would be without homes.
But in June the Stables Club, which has had a presence at the yard for more than 100 years, threw in the towel in its battle against the city. Judge Mokgere Masipa granted an order – by consent – that the club vacate the premises and deliver vacant possession thereof to the city by August 1.
The city said a court process was ongoing regarding the traders so it could not comment on the development.
“As a transparent organisation we invite anyone not satisfied with how the city is implementing its tender policies, to formally present such information to the city so that it can be investigated.”
The city encouraged citizens to report transgressions to the City Integrity and Investigations Unit at 0800 202 020.
The Mercury