We ve all been there out and about in public, having fun, maybe doing some shopping or sorting out some chores when you need to visit the loo. &nbsp; When nature calls, and the need is pressing, there s nothing worse than being caught .... the last thing you want is an accident. &nbsp; Now, an enterprising company in New York has spotted a gap in the market and tested a posh mobile loo service no kidding, the uber of public loos if you like. &nbsp; The toilet paper company Charmin recently pilot tested its on-demand mobile bathroom called Charmin Van-GO around Manhattan &nbsp;- it spent two days testing the service to see if the Uber-style bathroom service would catch on and become a viable thing. &nbsp; 4 New York reported that users who needed to go bad could go to CharminVanGo.com and follow simple directions to request the van.&nbsp; A totally private and super clean bathroom was delivered and could in future be delivered to customers, the company said. With the Charmin Van-GO, we are providing one of the largest, most-trafficked cities in the world a new way to Enjoy the Go on the go. &nbsp; Technology is helping people all over the world ease their toilet troubles. &nbsp; Take for example the App GottaGo!&nbsp; &nbsp; Making a splash in India, it promises to allow those in need to search for toilets around their current location using GPS. &nbsp; The app uses location to find the nearest accessible bathrooms or you can search by street, suburb or place name.&nbsp; &nbsp; Don t worry we have mapped an extensive list of restaurants, malls, hotels, etc to provide you with the best of results. Once you've selected your nearest toilet, the app will guide you directly to it with a customised route map! All you have to do is hold it until you get there! &nbsp; The features it promises: - Display nearby toilets in a List or on the Map - 1000s of toilets listed and Geolocated, with address and direction guide. - Malls, hospitals hotels, restaurants, railway stations, museums all mapped. - Ranking by users and the expert team. &nbsp; Users are urged to rate their restroom and help build up the database of information. &nbsp; They have already mapped the following cities: Mumbai, Pune, Delhi NCR and say they will be adding a city every week. &nbsp; Offering similar services is Toilet Finder, while many cities around the world have compiled their own lavetorial listings that are available on the web. &nbsp; China announced a &quot;toilet revolution&quot; earlier this year to help boost economic growth from 10.8% in 2015 to 12% by 2020. Last year it committed $290 million, according to Business Insider, in a bid to clean up its reputation with tourists and help drive economic growth in neglected areas.The administration also expects the investments to increase the number of visitors to China from 4 billion in 2015 to 6.4 billion by 2020