Two people, a man and a woman, were confirmed dead in a taxi accident on the M4 northbound near Virginia on Sunday morning, said paramedics.
 
Garrith Jamieson of Rescue Care said the taxi had caught alight after crashing on the busy freeway.
 
He said multiple patients were being treated at the scene.
 
The two dead suffered serious burns and 15 others had been transported to hospitals for treatment.
 
“The single taxi somehow lost control and overturned,” said Jamieson.

Shortly before 8pm on Saturday night, paramedics from ER24 were called to the N2 south near the Umgababa off-ramp to attend to a man who had been shot.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

 
“It is understood that the police noticed a vehicle on the side of the road and investigated. They found the man near his vehicle and called for paramedics. Sadly, there was nothing that paramedics could do for him and he was declared dead on the scene,” said ER24’s Werner Vermaak. 
 
Vermaak said as paramedics were leaving the scene, they came across a pedestrian who had been knocked down, on the opposite side of the highway. 
 
“He was treated for multiple fractures and abrasions before he was transported to a nearby hospital.”
 
Vermaak said the vehicle involved had already departed the scene. 
 
“Police attended the scenes and will investigate,” he said.
 
Netcare 911’s Nick Dollman reported that paramedics responded late on Saturday afternoon to reports that a minibus taxi had crashed on the M4 near Rossburgh.
 
Three minibus taxis had collided and a total of 45 commuters needed medical assistance and transportation to hospitals.
 
“The injuries ranged from minor to serious with the majority of the people sustaining only minor injuries,” said Dollman.
Fire fighters and rescuers used the “Jaws of Life” to access patients who were trapped in the taxi.
 
There was a serious crash on Friday afternoon on the N3 between Harrismith and Van Reenens Pass, about 3km before the pass.
  
Two cars had collided and narrowly missed a more serious head-on collision, said Netcare’s Dollman.
 
He said Netcare 911 and the Provincial Ambulance Service attended to and transported five patients to a Harrismith hospital, all in a stable condition.