Washington - Maryland Gov Larry Hogan overhauled the state's
medical marijuana regulating agency, appointing 10 new members to the panel,
which came under fire for its launch of a medical cannabis program.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

The appointees to the Maryland Medical Cannabis Commission
include a toxicologist, a pharmacist, a county sheriff and a county state's attorney.

Hogan filled three vacancies on the 16-member panel and
replaced six members whose terms had expired, doubling the number of minority
commissioners from two to four. John Gontrum, an assistant comptroller in the
state comptroller's office, was reappointed.

"It was time to move in a new direction," Hogan
spokesman Doug Mayer said.

The commission has been criticized by state lawmakers,
businesses and medical marijuana advocates for struggling to get the medical
marijuana program off the ground and for potential missteps in awarding
licenses to grow the drug.

Earlier this year, a legislative audit found that the
commission skirted state contracting rules and may have overcharged taxpayers
when it hired an outside group to review applications to open cannabis
businesses.

Del. Cheryl Glenn, D-Baltimore City, president of the state
Legislative Black Caucus and a lead sponsor of the state's medical marijuana
legalization bill, said Thursday that the caucus "appreciates any and all
efforts" to add minorities to the commission. The caucus is pushing for a
special session of the General Assembly, after a bill pushed by the caucus to
revamp the cannabis program failed in the final seconds of the regular session.

Glenn also said Hogan should ensure that a study on the
racial disparity in the state's medical marijuana industry, which he ordered in
April, is completed as soon as possible.

The legislation would have overhauled the marijuana
commission and addressed complaints that minority-owned businesses were passed
over for licenses and are not in a position to profit from the nascent
industry.
Read also: Medicinal cannabis gets the go-ahead 

Filling commission vacancies are Charles LoDico, a
toxicologist for the state Department of Health and Human Services; Barry Pope,
the drug rebate manager and clinical pharmacist for Conduent State Healthcare;
and Brian Lopez, a partner at Osprey Property.

The new commissioners are: Alvin Davis, a partner at
Cumberland Anesthesia and Pain Management Associates; Harford County Sheriff
Jeffrey Gahler; Frederick County State's Attorney Charles Smith III; Rachel
Rhodes, the horticulture associate for the University of Maryland Extension in
Queen Anne's County; Ehsan Abdeshahian, a doctor specializing in pain and
sports medicine; and Scott Welsh, owner of Maryland Flower and Foliage.

The commission will have two African American members, one
Hispanic member and one member of Middle Eastern descent, Mayer said.

 WASHINGTON POST