Emergency rescue services were kept busy at the weekend as they responded to serious incidents all over the country.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
In Port Edward in KwaZulu-Natal, on Saturday, National Sea Rescue Institute rescue teams responded to a request for medical assistance from a youth tour group.
The youngsters from Johannesburg were at a youth camp.
John Nicholas, NSRI Port Edward station commander, said in a statement that a 15-year-old girl had collapsed and lost consciousness.
“Our medical team responded in our sea rescue vehicle and KZN private ambulance services were also activated. On arrival, our medics assisted the youth tour group’s own paramedic that they had brought with them on the tour as part of their safety plan.”
The girl was then stabilised.
“She is believed to have suffered suspected seizures. The teenager has been transported to hospital by ambulance in a stable condition.”
In a separate incident, NSRI Mykonos station commander Casper Frylink said that duty crew members were activated on Friday following a request for assistance from a fishing boat, with three local fishermen onboard, reporting to be lost in dense fog and believed to be somewhere off-shore of St Helena Bay.
“We towed our sea rescue craft Gemini Rescuer II and launched at St Helena Bay and sweeping line searches moving further out to sea with each sweep were commenced in dense fog with 50-metre visibility.”
During the search operation the crew aboard the fishing boat reported hearing boat motor sounds passing nearby to them and were able to go towards the sounds where they found fellow fishermen with navigation equipment heading towards the harbour. “They followed the fellow fishing boats and we met up with them when they were safely in the harbour and no further assistance was required.”
St Francis Bay station commander Sarah Smith – relating details of a third incident – said that on Friday afternoon, duty crew were alerted to a 47-year-old fisherman suspected to be suffering a heart attack aboard the Chokka fishing boat Senhor Du Mundo.
“The boat had been fishing off Maitlands and after the crewman complained of chest pain they raised the alarm and started heading towards St Francis Bay.”
She said their sea rescue craft Spirit of St Francis II rendezvoused with the Chokka boat 2.5 nautical miles off-shore of the Jefferys Bay water tower and the crewman was taken onboard their sea rescue craft and brought to the Port of St Francis where he was transported to hospital by ambulance in a stable condition.
The Mercury