London - A cyberattack that struck at least 16 British National Health Service (NHS) organizations on Friday also hit the computer networks of companies and municipalities in dozens of other nations.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
"It's an international attack and a number of countries and organizations have been affected," British Prime Minister Theresa May said as she offered an update on her government's response.
There were reports of more than 75,000 similar attacks on Friday in 99 countries, with Russia, Ukraine and Taiwan hardest hit, according to the cybersecurity firm Avast.
Several hospitals in London and other parts of England and Scotland were affected by so-called ransomware, which blocks access to computer systems and then asks for money to unlock it.
A screenshot from one affected NHS device suggested the attackers were demanding payment of 300 dollars in the bitcoin digital currency within three days to recover the encrypted files.
Several NHS computer systems - including telephones - were crippled, causing delays at some hospitals amid fears the lives of patients were at risk.
Doctors and nurses resorted to using pen, paper and their own mobile phones to keep track of patient information, Britain's Press Association reported.
Patient records were not compromised, said May, who announced that Britain's National Cyber Security Centre was helping the NHS get its systems back online.
The ransomware attack did not appear to specifically target the NHS, experts said. The malware is typically spread through vulnerable computer networks.
Companies such Spain's telecommunications giant Telefonica and US parcel delivery firm FedEx were among the affected businesses.
The ransomware known as Wanna Decryptor is believed to be responsible.
The New York Times reported that hackers behind the ransomware used tools developed by the US National Security Agency. Those tools were leaked online last year, in an embarrassing data breach for the spy organization.
Jakub Kroustek of the Avast cyber security software company, based in the Czech Republic, said he had logged at least 75,000 detections by 1915 GMT Friday.
Kroustek wrote the company's blog that the first version on the ransomware had been detected in February, with the malware now available in 28 different languages, including Bulgarian and Vietnamese.
The northern Swedish municipality of Timra reported it was hit by the malware that holds computers hostage.
"About 70 computers were affected," Andreaz Stromgren, municipal chief, told dpa.
Timra has about 1,300 municipal employees but not all have personal computers, he said.
The municipality, located about 350 kilometres north of Stockholm, has contacted its IT provider and was preparing to install new versions of Windows operating systems, Stromgren added.
Initially it appeared that the affected computers were mainly used by office employees, and Stromgren said there were no signs that systems used for public water supply or other utilities were affected.
Fewer computers were affected after office hours and when employees had been instructed to shut down their computers.
 DPA