Minnie Dlamini and Lungile Radu have viewers glued to their TV screens in an all new lifestyle entertainment show titled Homeground. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
The show which broadcasts live every Monday, airs simultaneously on SuperSport 4 and Mzansi Magic on Mondays at 9.30pm.
“The show is about your weekly dosage of your favorite sporting moments of the week mixed with some lifestyle. We show you how the sports star got to where they are and what they get up to when relaxing. It's basically the best of all worlds,” said Radu. 
Combining a variety of sports, the show makes for great viewing. 
It also offers a big entertainment platform, breaking down South Africa’s existing segregation between the two worlds.
“The fact that we are sports and lifestyle orientated gives us the edge over others. It differentiates us from the rest. Every week we give you your sporting highlights of the week, results, and any other news that you might have missed out on including social media,” he said. 
Each week, the show will host guests in the studio who range from the nation’s favorite sports stars to actors and musicians. 
“They usually bring their entourage with them, and that's welcome. We love hearing from our guests, their family and friends. We sometimes even have a performance from the artist just to add the cherry on top. We do all of this while being interactive with our viewers via the poll question and reading their social media messages live on Mzansi Magic and SuperSport 4,” Radu said. 
Excited about this new venture, Radu said, he is also ecstatic about working with co-host and “South African Glam Tomboy”, Minnie Dlamini. 
“It's sports and lifestyle mixed into one and that's very much up my ally. I love sports, and of course life needs to be lived in style and I pride myself on that too. I'm also very excited to be working with our very own "South African Glam TomBoy" Minnie Dlamini.  She's very good at her craft and not too shabby on the eye, and I know we are going to have fun with it. All I want by the end of the episode, is to leave viewers wanting more,” he said.
Sphumelele Sibeko M-Net’s head of entertainment said with the help of SuperSport, the channel is charting on new territory. 
“We’re charting new territory with a live sports production, but we’re mixing it up with the hottest entertainment, which is what our viewers have come to expect from us. Homeground is hosted by two of South Africa’s foremost presenters, the momentous combo of Minnie and Lungsta, is sure to keep viewers entertained, informed and coming back for more,” Sibeko said.

* Catch Homeground every Monday, live on Mzansi Magic and SuperSport 4 at 9.30pm.