DURBAN – The ANC Youth League has threatened to shut down the University of KwaZulu-Natal's medicine school in the second semester if Council fails to investigate claims that places were being sold and examination papers sold through a syndicate. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
The syndicate was unraveled by the Sunday Tribune two weeks ago. Three people linked with the syndicate have since been arrested and released on R40 000 bail each. The three suspects are Varsha and Hitesh Bhatt, and Preshni Hiraman.  
The Bhatts own the internationally rated Durban restaurant, the Little Gujarat. 
ANC Youth League secretary Thinta Cibane said the university must act. 
"The arrested people do not have any formal association with the institution and as such will have no access to te admissions system of the university. For this operation to have been successful as it was for a number of years, other people within the institution had to have been involved," he said.
"Given the seriousness of matters relating to admission, this operation could only be successful with the involvement of senior officials in the university. These must be isolated and prosecuted for this act of blatant corruption.  The ANCYL is gravely concerned about the second part of this syndicate, the selling of examination papers together with their associated memorandum of answers. 
"This has practical implications for the reputation of the qualifications issued by the institution. We therefore demand for the council of the university to institute an internal investigation headed by an external independent person who will look into those involved in order to make recommendations in improving systems post this saga. The panel of investigators must be inclusive of all stakeholders including the SRC," said Cibane.
ANC Youth League leaders Thembo Ntuli and Thinta Cibane (right) at the party’s offices in Durban . Picture: Sihle Mlambo
The ANC Youth League has handed the university an ultimatum to respond within 30 days or "face the might of the youth league". 
At the weekend, the Sunday Tribune reported that the Progressive Youth Alliance - a student-led alliance of the ANCYL, Sasco and the YCLSA - had given students who had paid bribes to get into medical school, five days to come forward to the SRC. 
"We call upon the Hawks to continue their investigation until the real owners of this syndicate who we believe are located within the university officials are exposed. this form of corruption is a crime against the future generations as it denies deserving studets an opportunity to be admitted at the expense of those less deserving with financial resources," said Cibane. 
Cibane said the youth league would mobilise support to force the university to act when students returned from the winter holidays. 
Members of the public can contact the university fraud hotline on 0800 203 285. 



SUNDAY TRIBUNE