King Goodwill Zwelithini has strongly criticised violence against women and labelled those alleged to have abused, raped and killed women as “beasts”. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
He also did not mince his words about the failure of men to bring the scourge under control, saying it was not women’s responsibility to end the violence and the vitriolic attacks directed at them.
Zwelithini was addressing business leaders and activists at the Global Organisation of People of Indian Origin (Gopio) International Business Summit in Durban on Saturday.
The summit, organised by Gopio, aims to bring together a growing community of overseas Indians from nearly 50 countries. 
The king and IFP leader Mangosuthu Buthelezi were among the high profile guests at the event. They and other prominent individuals received awards for their dedicated service to the community.
“Why do we have so many beasts?” asked Zwelithini.
His criticism comes on the back of growing national outrage following the brutal murder of at least four women in less than two weeks in Johannesburg. Karabo Mo- koena, 22, was allegedly killed by her boyfriend who then dumped her body and set it alight. Popi Qwabe, 24, her friend Bongeka Phungula, 28, and an unidentified women were also killed.
“There is something that is a thorn in my heart, that is the continued attack and the killing of women and girl children,” said Zwelithini. 
It was up to men and boys in the country, perpetrators of this crime, to stand up and stop it.
“It is not the responsibility of women to stop abuse, it is the responsibility of every man and every boy,” he said.
“We need to stand up and deal with these unspoken assumptions that girls are weaker, not balanced and overly emotional, and that they are commodities there to service men,” he said.
“We cannot continue to sit back and watch as if nothing is happening. This continued vitriolic attack on women must be stopped, let us speak out against the violence directed to our mothers and sisters.” 
Spokesperson for the Commission for Gender Equality, Javu Baloyi, said the king’s voice would add weight to the fight against the scourge.
“The king is absolutely right, it is men who are doing this and it is our responsibility to stop it. We know who is doing this, but we are keeping quiet. 
“It is our responsibility to educate other men and the boy child. If we see a woman being grabbed in the street or screaming, it is our duty to intervene.”
Anshu Padayachee from the Desk for Abused Women said it was heartening to hear the king make such strong statements. 
Ishwar Ramlutchman of Gopio SA said they would be putting on programmes during women’s month to highlight the issue.
“Gender-based violence is an important issue and must be dealt with. The attack on women is an attack on the country and the economy,” he said.
The Mercury