DURBAN - ONE of Durban’s top tourist attractions will be out of order this week, when more than 7 000 people are expected in the city for the annual Tourism Indaba.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
The SkyCar, part of the Moses Mabhida Stadium’s attractions, has been broken for more than a week because of a faulty drive system.
The local ward councillor wants an investigation into why regular maintenance and checks were not done to the entire stadium.
“It’s ironic that one of the best known attractions for locals and visitors is out of order just when the city hosts the Indaba. So many people would have visited the stadium and wanted to see the city from the top of the stadium but now they won’t be able to do so. This is a loss to the city, but it could have been avoided if the city did regular checks at the stadium,” said ward 27 councillor Martin Meyer.
He said there were also panels from the stadium structure falling, as well as peeling paint.
“Just imagine if one of those panels had to fall on a person standing below. The peeling paint also looks unsightly. So much money was put into the stadium that we cannot afford to let simple maintenance and regular checks fall away. We need to know why no money is being channelled into this,” he said.
One of the reasons could possibly be the status of the management hanging in limbo, he said.
New parts
“There was a call for the stadium to come under the management of the ICC, but with a new city manager coming in, things can change, so possibly management doesn’t know what to do. I will be calling for a meeting soon so we can get to the bottom of this,” said Meyer.
Lunga Lamula, operations manager at the stadium, said: “On April 30 the SkyCar drives gave up. Otis assessed the SkyCar and submitted a quote and an order for new parts was placed on May 4 to replace the drives. The SkyCar is expected to be operational before the end of next week once the parts arrive from Joburg and are replaced.”
He added that the breakdown in the drives was unplanned.
“Scheduled maintenance and monthly servicing of the SkyCar is, of course, planned outside of peak times which are weekends, and school holidays etc…The timing is unfortunate indeed but the matter is being attended to as quickly as possible,” he said.
Phillip Sithole, head of Durban Tourism, said it was unfortunate that the SkyCar was closed during the World Economic Forum and for the duration of this coming week, when the Tourism Indaba would be held.
“It is beyond our control and it is unfortunate that the delegates will not get to experience this must-do attraction,” said Sithole.
However, he said it may be ideal as the expected adverse weather over the next few days would most likely keep people indoors.
 THE INDEPENDENT ON SATURDAY