Leaders of the country’s four main political parties on Sunday descended on various parts of Nquthu to make a final push for the hearts of voters ahead of Wednesday’s by-elections in the impoverished town. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
ANC president Jacob Zuma and IFP leader Mangosuthu Buthelezi addressed their respective parties’ massive rallies, each attracting no fewer than 10 000 supporters, in what was seen as a show of force by the two rivals battling for the control of the town and the district it falls under.
Julius Malema, meanwhile addressed smaller gatherings at wards 17 and 9 while DA leaders including Zwakele Mncwango, the provincial leader and MPLs Sizwe Mchunu and Masizole Mnqasela held a motorcade through some wards.
Although the real fight is between the ANC and the IFP, the DA and the EFF can swing the outcome of the election. In the last local government elections the DA got two seats and the EFF won one.
At the gatherings these leaders took potshots at their political opponents, while delivering a bouquet of promises to the Nquthu voters.
Addressing the ANC rally, Zuma told supporters not to waste their votes on smaller parties which stood no chance of winning elections. 
Buthelezi accused the ANC of collapsing the council so as to force the by-election, while Malema used his platforms to promise residents of the drought-stricken town piped water.
The outcome of Wednesday’s election is also likely to decide the balance of power in the uMzinyathi district, which is currently under administration. The district council can only be constituted after the results of the local municipality’s by-election, as that will determine which parties get representation at district level. 
The Nquthu municipal council was dissolved earlier this year after the hung council failed, on numerous occasions, to elect office-bearers, including the mayor and speaker.
“There are some people who were voted into Parliament, but you cannot even hear what they say. There are also those who just go there to disrupt and make sure that Parliament cannot do its work. 
“Why then should you vote for such people?” Zuma said during his address.
Urging supporters to come out in their numbers and vote for the ANC on Wednesday, Zuma said it was time to “liberate” the town. He said development had been slow in Nquthu because there has never been an outright winner in the council.
Buthelezi accused the ANC of not putting the needs of the people of Nquthu first, saying the ruling party was obsessed with scoring political points and had jeopardised service delivery in the municipality. 
“They are so hell-bent on power that they are willing to cause hardship and suffering for the sake of scoring a political point,” Buthelezi told IFP supporters.
He also said the ANC was using food parcels to bribe voters. He told people to accept these (food parcels), but to reject the bribe by voting with their conscience. The charge was echoed by Malema, who addressed a significantly smaller gathering of about 1 000 people in ward 17.
“I did not promise you food parcels and T-shirts because I do not buy votes… Many people have been voting for free T-shirts since 1994, but there are no jobs, no water and no proper roads. 
“Why can’t they (the ANC) save that money and use it to put in water pipes?” Malema said there was no reason why the poor should not have water when “Zuma’s cows are drinking from a R6 million swimming pool.”
The Mercury