DURBAN - FORMER KwaZulu-Natal ANC chairman Senzo Mchunu denies claims that he is supporting Deputy President Cyril Ramaphosa to become the next president of the ANC when the party elects new leadership in December. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Ramaphosa and Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma’s names are punted for the top job although they have not formally accepted nomination. 
Mchunu, who disappeared from the scene after he was dislodged by Sihle Zikalala at the provincial conference in Pietermaritzburg two years ago, is making a comeback. 
He was spotted recently with Ramaphosa at public event in Newcastle and Empangeni. 
During an interview with Independent Media, Mchunu said being seen with Ramaphosa had nothing to do with supporting him. “I am on the side of the ANC, and he is the deputy president of the ANC of which I am a member.
“Ramaphosa was with the president (Jacob Zuma) on Thursday during the Freedom Day celebration in Umkhanyakude. Does that mean Zuma supports Ramaphosa?” he asked.
A group dubbed CR17 (Cyril Ramaphosa 2017) which is believed to be campaigning for Ramaphosa has been circulating his top six, which had Mchunu as secretary-general while ANC treasurer- general Zweli Mkhize was placed as deputy president.
Human Settlements Minister Lindiwe Sisulu appears on the list as chairperson, Gauteng provincial chairman Paul Mashatile as treasurer-general and National Council of Provinces chairperson, Thandi Modise as deputy secretary-general. 
This is not the first time Mchunu is linked with an anti-Zuma camp. Building up to the 2012 national conference in Mangaung, he was alleged to be part of a faction called “Forces of Change” that supported Kgalema Motlanthe, a claim he has denied. 
“I have been active in my branch. It's just that the media had not been there. I campaigned for the local government elections even after I had been fired.
“I campaigned in Nongoma and at my home village of Nhlwathi in Hlabisa,” he said.
He said he was no longer bitter about the outcome of the conference because he still enjoys support from “a number of comrades”.
It had been said that Ramaphosa was relying on Mchunu to consolidate his prospect to win the December conference.
Mchunu said “there were a number of comrades who I continue to speak to, and there are a number of comrades who continue to speak to me.”
He laughed off claims that Zuma had a hand in swaying voters against him for Zikalala to win.
“It is him (Zuma) who can respond better to that allegation,” he chuckled.
Rumours were further sparked when Mchunu was seen leaving the ANC provincial birthday party in KwaDukuza immediately after the arrival of Zuma. “In a day you have more than one thing to do. My departure had nothing to do with the arrival of the president. I just had to leave at that particular time.”