DURBAN - Durban’s new city manager, Sipho Nzuza, 53, says ratepayers will be his number one priority, as it’s their money that is needed to ensure the city thrives.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
In an interview with the Sunday Tribune, the man who this week started in his new position, filling the shoes previously occupied by Michael Sutcliffe and, after him, Sbu Sithole, says the service delivery needs of ratepayers are paramount and a clean audit should be a matter of fact every year. 
“I need ratepayers to be happy. If they are not happy, I won’t recover the budget. Ratepayers need to pay their money to the municipality, knowing they will be satisfied with the service they get. So it’s very important to me to have a competent staff that can deliver to the needs of the people.” 
Nzuza, who administers a city budget of R41.6 billion, has experience in banking, auditing and administration.
“While we need to constantly engage ratepayers, we also have to engage politicians to understand their needs and then deliver without being drawn into politics. As administrators we have to be able to implement on the ground,” he says. 
Although he has only been in office for a week, he says he is aware of the challenges. One of these is the Delangokubona Business Forum, which has been aggressively taking over construction sites, demanding jobs and a cut of profits.
“I am not aware of all the details, but I have heard of Delangokubona, although I don’t really know what they want.
“What I can say is that we have to engage people if they have complaints,” he says. 
“I don’t believe that people would just cause a disruption without first having complained.
“Open communication is what we are going to have and fairness to everyone without being biased due to politics. Our customers need to be treated fairly. 
“Maybe those people (Delangokubona) want to be suppliers. Again we need to look at our procurement services, who receives tenders? Are people getting work in a fair process? We need to make sure processes are transparent and that everybody is following the rules of proper governance because, without that, you end up with disgruntled people who disrupt services.”
Nzuza has previously served as a member of the Audit Committee Forum, a joint initiative between KPMG and the Institute of Directors in southern Africa.
“The forum is where policies and auditing standards are crafted. When you see all these manuals coming out that regulate the procedures of auditing, well, they are checked and recommended by that forum. What was striking for me at the time was that I was the only black guy there. It’s very difficult being invited to that forum because it’s for people who have serious experience,” he says.
Nzuza, who is married to Gcina and has two sons, Bonga and Njabulo, is from uMlazi V section and matriculated at the uMlazi Commercial school.
He did a BComm Accounting degree through Unisa and got his MBA at the University of KwaZulu-Natal (when it was Durban Westville).
Nzuza has served as a director at Sizwe Ntsaluba Gobodo auditing firm. He honed his skills at the Ithala Bank, Standard Bank and Transnet.
His experience in government includes serving on auditing committees for the uMdoni district municipality, Umngeni Municipality, KZN legislature and the gambling board.
He credits Sizwe Nxasana (chief executive of FirstRand Limited) with playing a fundamental role in shaping him as as an auditor and accountant.
He also speaks fondly of the staff at Transnet in Cape Town, where he was port manager.
“While it’s good for me to leave, it’s sad too as we were working on big Operation Pakisa projects. I was also setting up a cruise terminal, which was going to be operated by the V&A. That was one project I wanted to see coming through, but I won’t be able to because of this new role. But I am looking forward to my new job,” says Nzuza.
His interests also lie in investment and tourism.
“I would like to see Durban mentioned among the best cities in the world.”
SUNDAY TRIBUNE