AS A result of the countdown to the ANC’s elective conference in December and the general election in 2019, there is an urgent need for an informed discourse on the political options the electorate will have to make a choice on, writes Professor George Devenish.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
It is manifest that important political changes have already and are in the process of taking place in South Africa.
In this regard, it must be noted that in South Africa before the local government elections on August 3 last year, our country could have been accurately described as a dominant party state democracy.
This flowed from the fact that the ANC secured 63% in the local government elections of 2011. Last year, its support diminished to 53.91%.
A paradigmatic change has occurred with its support having dwindled to below 55%.
The results illustrate in no uncertain terms that the days of ANC hegemony in South African politics are over and that what is emerging is a system of strong multi-party democracy, which augurs well for democracy in South Africa.
The discord in the ANC and the tripartite alliance in all probability, it is submitted, are likely to contribute to a re-orientation of political parties in South Africa, along the lines of essentially economic policy, as occurs with European political parties, rather than along the lines of race and culture. This reorientation will span the entire political spectrum from left to right.
On the left are found those of a socialist/Marxist character, next to which are found those of a social democratic philosophy. In the middle are found those referred to in Europe as Christian Democratic and on the right those of a racial nationalist sentiment.
Empty political slogans do not contribute to an informed political debate. So for instance what do the slogans “radical economic transformation” and “white monopoly capital” actually mean and entail.
What exact economic model is the ANC leadership proposing using these terms? Does it, for instance, involve expropriation of property without compensation, requiring an amendment to the constitution?
This is virtually a socialist option. Furthermore, what would be the consequence of such a radical change for the economy and investor confidence if such a policy were effected?
Or does it merely require the creation of a welfare state as occurred in the UK and Continental countries, involving, inter alia, the dole or a basic income grant, a national health insurance plan and more aggressive affirmative action and cadre deployment?
This is more or less a social democratic option. These models are just two of a range that need to be unpacked and discussed.
Whatever economic model is adopted, to be successful, it would have to be pursued by a competent government and political leaders that are not enmeshed in the kind of corruption and scandal that the Zuma administration has become characteristic of.
This administration appears to be in a state of chronic political crisis, the consequences of which are difficult to predict and have a negative impact on the economy as occurred with the downgrade to junk status.
What is required is metaphorically a clean slate from a political and administrative point of view and new and inspired political leadership to take the country forward.
This could transpire with a reorientation of political parties should the ANC be defeated nationally in 2019 by a coalition or realignment of political parties.
At present the ANC is incapable of reform and in a state of inexorable decline, as often occurs with liberation movements, after about two decades of office, like the Congress Party of India?
These pertinent issues require penetrating political discourse in an intelligent debate and discussion.
What is of singular significance for us is that South Africa has infinite potential. We as a nation have both the human and natural resources to resolve our formidable political and economic problems.
The correct choices need to be made. Political leadership that is competent and inspired could bring economic justice and prosperity for all our people. This is the inordinate challenge facing us as a nation.
• Devenish is an emeritus professor at UKZN and helped draft the interim constitution in 1993.
SUNDAY TRIBUNE