There are a variety of brand new TV shows exploding on television every week.
And because we know that time is often of the essence, we’ve sifted out the five best shows for you to enjoy. 
Some shows have already started but you can still jump on the bandwagon with a quick catch-up of just two to three episodes.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads

READ: Vivica's Magic Men brings sexy back


Dear White People on Netflix, currently on since April 28


Based on the acclaimed film of the same name, this Netflix-original series follows a group of students of color at Winchester University, a predominantly white Ivy League college. The students are faced with a landscape of cultural bias, social injustice, misguided activism and slippery politics. Through an absurdist lens, the series uses irony, self-deprecation, brutal honesty and humor to highlight issues that still plague today's"post-racial" society. Created and produced by Justin Simien. 

The Surgery Ship on National Geographic from May 6



This eight-part series take a more in-depth look into The Surgery Ship and the inspiring stories of the volunteer doctors and nurses making life and death decisions every day, as well as the thousands of patients who desperately need their help. Africa Mercy is run by Mercy Ships, a global charity that has delivered free world-class healthcare for the poor for nearly 40 years. 

The doctors and nurses on board the ship face the biggest medical and ethical challenge of their lives. Not only are they confronted by unbelievable illness that many have never seen outside of textbooks, they must also make incredibly difficult decisions about who they are able to help out of the thousands of patients they see. A dramatic journey unfolds as they deal with life and death cases – and balance the fates of these patients in their hands.

Kevin Can Wait on M-Net from May 24
 
Sharing the spotlight together once more is The King of Queens' Kevin James and Leah Remini as they reunited on Kevin Can Wait.
In this hilarious new show, Kevin, a newly retired police officer looks forward to spending more quality time with his wife and three kids only to discover he faces much tougher challenges at home than he ever did on the streets.

Timeless from May 27 from M-Net


Timeless is an American science fiction time travel drama series. 
When an experimental time machine is stolen, a history professor, a soldier and an engineer are tasked with capturing the culprit only to learn that he plans to rewrite American history and that each of them has a connection to his plan as well as the mysterious organization that funded the machine's development.
Starring Abigail Spencer, Matt Lanter and Malcolm Barrett.Little Boy Blue from May 17 on ITV ChoiceBased on a true story that shocked a nation, Little Boy Blue is a powerful four-part factual drama, from BAFTA-winning writer and executive producer Jeff Pope (Appropriate Adult) that centres on the devastating impact on a city of an innocent child’s murder amid a wave of gang violence.Little Boy Blue focuses on the murder of 11‐year‐old Rhys Jones in Croxteth, Liverpool, in 2007. It explores the parent's ordeal, and tells the story of how Rhys’s murderer and associates were eventually brought to justice.