A cunning disguise, dressed in a pink shirt, did not help an uninvited slithering guest avoid being chucked out of a Westville home on Saturday. The guest, a black mamba, estimated to be just over 2m long, tried to hide in a resident’s wardrobe, lifting itself into her clothes before being captured. Nick Evans, founder of the KZN Amphibian and Reptile Conservation, a chapter of the The Lawrence Anthony Earth Organization, was the man who dared to play bouncer at this one mamba party. He said the frantic home owner had called him, saying she had woken up from an afternoon nap to find the snake next to her bed. “Everybody thinks any dark snake is a black  mamba but when she told me it was three to four metres long, I knew it was,” said Evans. With a bite that can kill an adult in 7 to 15 hours without antivenom, the home owner had locked the snake in the bedroom after making her escape. “The room was quite cluttered with things everywhere but I saw the cupboard was open so had a feeling it would be in there.”The snake catcher's intuition was right. Inside the wardrobe was the body of the snake with its head bobbing in and out of the hanging clothes.“I used tongs to secure its head then picked it up with my hands. Black mambas are very misunderstood, they don’t just attack. He was trying to hide being the clothes, getting a little bit cheeky and opened the mouth to show the black inside as a warning, but the poor thing was terrified and just wanted to be left alone,” said Evans. Although this time of year is not snake season, Evans said mamba sightings were common as it was their breeding season.“Also, this house borders Paradise Valley (Nature Reserve). But in addition to that, the house was quite cluttered so the snake was probably looking for shelter or for rats,” said Evans. Evans warned against killing or trying to capture black mambas which can strike at lightning speed, injecting a neurotoxic venom which shuts down the body. Fatalities were not common as antivenom is widely available. Evans will measure and check the gender of the snake as well as micro chip it for identification before releasing it. The home owner was very grateful to get rid of her unwanted guest.