If you are an aspiring young fashion designer, then this could be your big break. 
In the latest reality show to hit South Africa, fashion icon, David Tlale is giving 12 hopeful fashion designers a chance to battle it out for the title of Assistant Designer for the house of David Tlale. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
The Intern will give 12 lucky contestants the opportunity to take part in a 13-week internship programme consisting of various challenges and eliminations.
In the first phase, David and his team will be visiting, Cape Town, Castle of Good Hope on May 22 and 23 ; Durban, IGoda Incubator on May 25 and 26; Polokwane, TBC on May 29 and 30 and Johannesburg, Johannesburg City Hall on June 1 and 2 for a national roadshow.
On the day, David will be giving workshops to the hopeful contestants at each of the locations and will choose the lucky 12 contestants that will join him in Johannesburg.
The final 12 contestants that are chosen will then not only compete on the 13-week reality TV show to be The Intern, but will also, on elimination from the TV show, get an opportunity to join David Tlale's in-house internship programme for six months. Closing dates for each city is the second day of the competition at noon.
Participating in the program requires contestants to either be self-taught with a minimum of three years’ experience in the fashion industry, or be student currently working on achieving their degree or diploma in Fashion Design (final year students only). Above all, this internship is open to everyone residing in South Africa. Every selected contestant will receive exposure on national television during the show, and will participate in David Tlale’s internship programme after elimination for a period of six months.
The ultimate winner of the TV show will become David’s assistant designer and win a studio to the value of R250 000. 
To enter, aspiring designers must compile a complete fashion design portfolio of their own work including their fashion résumé.
The portfolio will then be judged by David Tlale. Three complete garments must be ready to show at the pre-judging, models and styling will be provided.
All the entry information can be found on www.theintern.co.za for electronic submission. 
You can also submit at your nearest SABC office addressing it to:

VIOLET SEKHIBIDU or PRINCE NDLOVU
Commissioning Editor; Content Hub.
Tel: 011 714 5354
4th floor TV office building,
Cnr. Henley & Artillery roads,
Auckland Park,
Johannesburg, 2006 

If you have not been able to submit your portfolio beforehand, take your design portfolio on the day to be judged by Tlale.