Speaking to members of the Shembe Church in eSikhawini near Empangeni, on Tuesday, Deputy President Cyril Ramaphosa asked the church to pray for the ANC because things were going wrong for the party.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Comparing the church founder with the founding fathers of the ANC, he congratulated church leaders for being able to stick to the values on which it was founded in the early 1900s.
“I look at this church and I think about my own church, the ANC. I wonder whether our founders, the likes of John Langalibalele Dube, who was a close friend of the founder of the Shembe church would be pleased with the current state of affairs in the ANC.”
He said the ANC was in need of divine intervention. “If anyone watched the news (on Monday) you would have seen what happened to the president. He was not able to address the workers’ rally because there was unhappiness about how the programme was organised.”
Workers affiliated to Cosatu objected to Zuma’s presence at the rally and refused to let him speak which led to its cancellation.
“We ask the churches, which have always been a very important institution for the ANC, to pray for the party because it is clear that we are in a very dark place.” 
Ramaphosa was at the event with former KwaZulu-Natal premier Senzo Mchunu, who is believed to be backing him to succeed President Jacob Zuma as ANC president.
Mchunu has been in the political wilderness after he lost his position as ANC provincial chairman to Sihle Zikalala two years ago  and resigned as KZN premier.
However, on Monday, during a Cosatu rally in Durban it was evident he still enjoyed support from some quarters and was warmly received by the crowd.
Asked on Tuesday about whether he was concerned with being seen with Mchunu, Ramaphosa said he was an “ANC comrade”  and that he associates with all ANC comrades without discrimination.
Later, while Ramaphosa was leaving the event, in which the church was celebrating its founder, Isaiah Shembe, a senior pastor questioned him about the succession debate. “You should state clearly what you are here for; do not beat about the bush,” said Mthandeni Ntombela.
He said Ramaphosa should have declared his presidential ambitions at the event.
Politicians regularly visit the church to ask for blessings and it had been mentioned earlier on Tuesday that Zuma had visited the church to receive blessings prior to him becoming president. 
But Ramaphosa had earlier told the congregation: “I am not here looking for a position (to become president).”
Ntombela said: “You were in the presence of the inkosi (Shembe); you should have declared your ambitions and sought his blessing. I want you to come back here before July and ask for his blessing.”
Ramaphosa did not respond directly to Ntombela and merely laughed as he was ushered away by his bodyguards.
The Mercury