Aimed at exposing and reviving solo artists in the Indian
classical music and dance discipline, Durban’s Kathak artist, Manesh Maharaj,
formed the festival Sankalp. 


Maharaj fell in love with the arts, and more specifically
Kathak, after watching his Guru (teacher) Madhurita Sarang perform in Indian. 



He then began his formal training in this art form in
Mumbai, under the same Guru, where he spent seven years undergoing rigorous
training. He is also a qualified musician and on returning to South African,
launched the Kala Darshan Institute of Classical Music. 



Then, three years ago, under his directorship came Sankalp.



Sankalp, a
Sanskrit term which translates to “a solemn vow to uphold one’s purpose with
the highest trust”, is a motto that holds strongly for Maharaj. 



“I recognise my purpose to be the preservation of Indian
classical music and dance in South Africa as this needs attention, if not we
could lose a precious aspect of our heritage and identity. I also endeavour to
pass on this heritage to the next generation as the standard, respect and
sanctity of our classical performing arts lay in their hands,” he said.



In its third year, the festival educates and enlightens
the Indian community of their cultural heritage of the classical arts. It also
inspires youth to pursue the classical arts as a means towards self empowerment
and self realisation steering them away from the negative influences and vices
of life.



“The festival is for young and aspiring artists who wish
to showcase their talents, seasoned exponents of classical music and dance as
well as artists who have taken a respite from a performing career and wish to
make a comeback. Sankalp affords them
a conducive platform and a rare opportunity to present their work and share their
artistry with the audience,” Maharaj said. 



The festival line-up include, Rory Booth, a Kathak
performer, Pradosh Maharaj, a Hindustani vocalist, Mahesh Narotam, an Indian
bamboo side blown flute player, Pruthvi Karpoormath a Carnatic vocalist,
Rishalan and Cameron Govender, both Bharata Natyam dancers and Taresh
Harreeparshad a Kathak performer.



The highlight of the festival is the launch of an
all-male classical Indian dance ensemble titled, Purusham, meaning “the cosmic
man”. 



Maharaj said this group was inspired by his experiences
in the discipline, where young males who have the potential and passion to
dance lack the support of their family. 



“In some cases a complete negative stance has been
adopted by parents if their sons wish to pursue dance. Purusham aims to create
a conducive platform for male dancers and to eradicate stereotypes. It hopes to
inspire male dancers to follow their passion and for society to recognise
Indian classical dance as an integral part of our cultural heritage,” explained
Maharaj. 



He said, as a classical artist himself, the need to
preserve Indian culture and heritage required serious attention. 



“As an Indian community we are largely influenced and
sometimes defined by what is seen in Bollywood movies. This is misleading. The
true essence of culture is reflected through the classical performing
arts.  This gives a community its depth, richness and identity. It
provides us with a legacy that will help sustain the culture of a community,
strengthening its roots in the process,” Maharaj said. 





* Kala Darshan
will be presenting SANKALP – the 3rd annual festival of classical music and
dance on May 27 at the Thekwini College Auditorium (262 Daintree Avenue,
Asherville) at 5:30pm.



Tickets will be available at the door prior to the
performance or can be reserved by calling 0824226865.