With the variety of television shows around, we often
chose to watch a particular show to satisfy a specific TV craving we may have. 



It’s often rare to find a series that offers you the whole
shebang - taking your emotions on a complete roller-coaster ride, leaving you
so god-smacked that you can’t help but watch episode after episode. 



The next thing you know, it’s 3am and you’re still glued
to your TV screen. 



What’s so special about 
This Is Us - a new dramedy soon to air on M-net (March 28), is that it
tackles real life issues like race, obesity, job satisfaction and alcoholism,
to name a few. 



And while doing so, offers comedy, drama, intrigue, an
element of surprise and moments that leave you crying so hard, you need a box
of Kleenex.



This Is Us ticks all the boxes of being a great drama
series, and so, rightfully deserved to win the three Golden Globes it was
nominated for. 



In the series, screenwriter Dan Fogelman, methodically
weaves four seemingly unrelated stories into a believable and emotional
whole through detailed relatable moments, conversations and confrontations that
are funny, tender and sometimes extremely painful.



This Is Us boasts a stalla cast which includes Milo
Ventimiglia as Jack, Mandy Moore as Rebecca, Chrissy Metz as Kate, Justin
Hartely as Kevin and Sterling K Brown as Randall, among others.



The first episode, although seemly slow, creates a bases
on which the storyline unfolds. 



The characters lives intertwined, from sharing the same
birthday, to so much more. 



Throughout the series, the lives of Rebecca, Jack and
their three children - Kevin, Kate and Randall - are presented at different
points in time. 



The Rebecca and Jack stories take place during the early
stage of their marriage, surrounding the birth of the three children, or at
different phases of the children's upbringing, which was not always smooth
sailing for any of them.



What follows next are separate stories concerning Kate,
Kevin and Randall while in their adult years, each who has their own baggage stemming
from their upbringing and childhood. 



In each passing episode character storylines deepen.



Kate deals with being over-weight, Kevin has issues with
being neglected and being in an unsatisfying job and Randall deals with being
the outsider in the family.



The story shows us the emotional ties that exist even if
you aren’t related, but still consider yourself a family.  



This series
promises to challenge your everyday presumptions about the people you think you
know.



To reveal any more would ruin one of the best television
shows in recent history. 



* Catch This Is Us from May 29 on M-net at
7.30pm.