DURBAN – ONE makes chemistry sets and the other fashion items out of recyclables – and these two Durbanites hope their start-up businesses will soon take flight and expand across the country and the world.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Nozipho Zulu, of ZuluGal Retro, and Bathabile Mpofu, of ChemStart, have been selected to be part of Red Bull’s Amaphiko Academy, an incubator programme for grassroots social entrepreneurs.
This month, Zulu and Mpofu, with other winners from across the country, will work with world-leading innovators, entrepreneurs and storytellers to get the inspiration, mentorship and practical know-how they need to take their projects to the next level.
Each project chosen has a social benefit.
ZuluGal Retro began a few years ago when fine artist Zulu answered the call to help physically challenged people with skills to empower themselves, using her art background.
“I used to work on a project with the Department of Education and I went to many schools that catered for the differently-abled. I realised they had little or no chance of finding employment once they left school and I decided to give them skills they could use to earn an income, or be part of a company. I decided to use recyclable materials such as plastics because they were cheap and easy to find,” she said.
The plastic banners have been fashioned into bags and jewellery items, and in some cases make more than 100% profit.
“I have 10 people on the project, but with the help of Red Bull I am sure we will be able to equip more people with skills,” she said.
Meanwhile, while Mpofu’s dreams of becoming a doctor did not materialise, it may have been for a good reason.
“I did my first year of medicine and I found it difficult, especially chemistry. Possibly one of the reasons for this, as with many of the other students, was that we did not have access to chemistry and labs when we were at school, to have a good foundation and understanding of this field,” she said. 
Persevering, Mpofu completed her studies in chemistry, leaving medicine. She also completed a business course.
Some time later, Mpofu decided to create a chemistry set that would offer pupils an understanding of chemistry and to conduct their own experiments.
“We take these sets out to schools and parents can buy them for their kids to help them learn. It exposes children to science and gets them interested in this field. I will pursue my studies further and, who knows, one day I will earn that doctorate,” she said.
 THE INDEPENDENT ON SATURDAY