Three men are taking on an epic 230 km hike through the Drakensberg in an expedition titled the “Climb for K9”.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
They will be raising funds for dogs working for anti-poaching units at the Kruger National Park and also want to raise awareness about the Berg’s unique wilderness and wildlife conservation.
The three, says SANParks Honorary Rangers KwaZulu-Natal Region in a statement, will hike unassisted, with just one re-supply at the top of Sani Pass before descending to Bushman’s Nek near Underberg around June 7.
The expedition is set to begin on May 25, depending on the weather.
“They are doing this to raise awareness about the importance of protecting the Drakensberg and the wildlife in the national parks. All proceeds will be donated to the Kruger National Park canine (K9) counter-poaching units managed from the SANPark K9 Centre near Phabeni Gate.”
The canine units have reinforced efforts to combat rhino poaching in Kruger and beyond.
“In 2016, for the first time, the number of rhino killed in the Kruger National Park was less than the year before, while the number of arrests of poachers doubled. K9 units were involved in 90% of these arrests. 
“Fifty-two dogs and their handlers are on duty in the Kruger National Park right now. 
“The units are deployed by helicopters, vehicles, and on foot, to patrol our national parks. They work in remote and pristine areas, often unassisted – just as it will be on the Drakensberg hike.”
The honorary rangers, said the statement, were a voluntary entity and had, since 2012, proved to be a “game changer” in the war on poaching.
“But maintaining the health and training of the 52 dogs and their handlers deployed in KNP alone requires more funds than SANParks’ limited budget can accommodate, which is why five of the 33 honorary ranger regions in the country are assisting with their upkeep.”
The three hikers from KwaZulu-Natal – Grant Melville, Ian Shooter and Jeffery Mthabela – each have extensive bush experience.
Melville has 15 years of hiking and bush experience, while Shooter is a qualified guide with 35 years of hiking experience in the Drakensberg.
Mthabela has worked as his assistant for 13 years and has lived his whole life in the Mnweni valley in the area. 
Their hike has no predetermined routes or even trails, and requires the ascent of at least five of the spectacular ridges and summits along the way. 
“They will set off for the chain ladders from the Phuthaditjhaba (Witsieshoek) Sentinel car park in Free State on May 25 at 9am. The route takes them over the 3000m+ peaks of Mont Aux Sources, Champagne Castle and Mafadi – the highest peak in South Africa – and Giant’s Castle, before they descend through Thamathu Pass to Bushman’s Nek Hotel near Underberg.”
The association explained that the Drakensberg was vitally important as one of the main water catchment areas that fed the province’s rivers. 
“We are hiking to raise awareness about the plight of our rhino and elephant populations, and all the other animals killed by poachers.”
Events the public can attend to show their support include:

A pre-launch will be held at the SANParks KNP K9 Centre near in the Kruger National Park on May 18 at 10.30 am to 2pm.The start of the expedition from the Sentinel car park near Phuthaditjhaba is set for May 25 at 9am (weather permitting)The re-supply of the expedition at the top of Sani Pass (Sani Mountain Lodge inside Lesotho) is estimated for June 4The finish of the expedition at the Bushman’s Nek Berg and Trout Resort is estimated for June 7.

 
 For more information, e-mail the organisers on ClimbforK9@gmail.com
The Mercury