DURBAN - Shot five times and badly beaten. That was the distressing sight that greeted staff at Crow (Centre for Rehabilitation of Wildlife) after the shooting of a monkey in Chatsworth last week.  This shooting follows recent reports of monkeys being poisoned in Hibberdene, Hilton and Queensburgh.Crow spokesperson, Chandre de Bruyn, said the monkey “was a mature female that unfortunately passed away due to her severe injuries, besides being shot five times, she was also very bruised which indicates that she had been beaten”. De Bruyn added that it was currently mating season for monkeys, creating more activity within groups. Monkey Helpline founder Steve Smit confirmed recent reports of poisoning of monkeys and said their rescue call-outs had increased to between five and ten call-outs a day. “On Tuesday this week, we responded to 10 call-outs. Every single day we pick up monkeys which have been horrifically injured. It’s a genuine worry. “Last week we rescued a male monkey in Westville who had five pellets in him. There are a large number of pellet injuries and I believe people are buying pellet guns to be used for security because it is difficult to get a gun licence. “The increase in call-outs is not due to more monkeys as the population is in decline, but rather more cars on the road, more dogs, more pellet guns, more electric fencing. “We have cases from all over Durban. It is mating time now and there’s lots of activity in the troops with complicated dynamics. “There’s terrible cruelty and suffering. If people took time to understand monkey behaviour, there would be far less friction,” said Smit. This week Crow issued guidelines on how to deter monkeys from gardens, with De Bruyn saying: “Monkeys are highly intelligent animals, but they are creatures of habit. They often establish certain gardens as a preferable target for food and make it a regular stop-off on their route.”Methods used to deter monkeys include: l Deny them access to food. Secure a vegetable garden with fence or roof or by spraying them with water. A Howick resident converted a normal alarm sensor connected to a sprinkler into a water alarm that sprayed every time the monkeys went near his vegetable garden.l Monkeys do not like water. Water guns work well. Spray with water using the same pressure which would be used on a small child.l Hang reflective items, such as old CDs, from tree branches or at points where monkeys access your garden. They do not like reflections and it can be a deterrent.l Rubber snakes. These only work if you use a variety of rubber snakes and move them to a different location every day. If monkeys see the same snake in the same spot, they will investigate and realise it is not a real threat. l If your windows are open, keep the opening as small as possible to ensure they cannot get through.Be consistent in your efforts and use multiple strategies at the same time so they will deem your garden undesirable and will stop daily  appearances.For further advice on dealing with monkeys, contact Crow on 031 462 1127 or Monkey Helpline on 082 659 4711 or 082 411 5444.THE INDEPENDENT ON SATURDAY