Solly Suleman, who chairs the
Islamic Medical Association of
South Africa, puts the concept of private
institutions on the tableADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Thousands of families want their children to become health professionals, especially medical doctors.
Reasons may include helping the community but, ultimately, prestige and wealth creation are attached. 
Doctors are looked up to and improve the profile of families – people can boast “my son/daughter is a doctor”. 
The discriminatory nature of access to medical schools in South Africa results in thousands of deserving students not being allowed in.
Indians, accounting for proportionately the largest number of applicants, have to have very high marks to get a place.
There has to be a policy in place to address the historical imbalance in the racial profile of health professionals, but no more than 50% should be set aside for this corrective measure and the rest should be awarded on merit.
Furthermore, the seats set aside should be only for students who have not been to model C or private schools, irrespective of race.
This exclusionary policy has resulted in thousands of South African students studying in China, Mauritius, Romania, Dubai and elsewhere, probably costing the fiscus billions of rand to meet the desires of their families.
The tragedy is that many do not complete their studies or spend years away from home and the degrees are often not recognised.
Usually these graduates have to write the Health Professions Council of SA exams and many fail because of the poor quality of the graduate courses. 
Tertiary education is expensive and most students cannot afford it.
Many are able to attend universities and colleges thanks to the National Student Financial Aid Scheme, bursaries or loans. And many work to pay their way.
To afford it, families are prepared to sacrifice and take on multiple jobs with spouses and elder siblings working to pay for those trying to become health professionals.
However, many cannot send their relatives abroad, either because they cannot afford the exorbitant fees or are afraid to send them away from their home country or have religious reasons.
The perennial question is: Why is the government not allowing the establishment of private health sciences campuses?
Feedback is that this is for the well off or privileged. This response to me is mind-boggling.
Private colleges, irrespective of profession or career choice, are for those who can afford and those granted bursaries.
Many countries have dozens of private medical schools that thrive and offer choices to students excluded from public medical schools. 
In South Africa, this is more relevant since thousands of high performers are excluded based on race.
The government’s interference in the private sector compromises the fate of thousands.
The impact of creating private institutions would be job creation, the retention of billions currently spent overseas, the attraction of foreign students and foreign direct investment, and the shortage of health professionals addressed.
Medical schools from India, Malaysia and Dubai have shown interest in partnerships to establish health faculties in South Africa.
But private medical schools must be established now to reap the benefits in five years’ time.
* Suleman chairs the
Islamic Medical Association of
South Africa. 
SUNDAY TRIBUNE