Diners were left traumatised after being robbed at a family restaurant in Durban North in broad daylight on Monday.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
A Glenashley mother, who did not want to be named, said she had gone to the Apache River Spur at the Riverside Sports complex to pick up her teenage son when she was approached by the men. 
“One was wearing a balaclava. I can’t tell you if the other one was. They didn’t say anything and we tried not to make eye contact but still listen to their instructions,” she said. 
The armed men gestured them to a table where two other people were sitting. 
“They took my son’s phone and said; ‘we don’t want to hurt your mother’ then took my car keys and bag. For some reason they thought the man at the table had a gun so they put their gun on his cheek but they moved on. I can’t even tell you what was happening around us, it’s kind of a blur,” said the mother. 
The men then shot at the glass window of a play area which cracked but did not break. In another section of the play area, a woman was hiding with children. 
Another shot rang out and some patrons ran to the back of the restaurant. 
“We ran and hid in a room which I think used to be a kitchen, I told everyone to lie down and stay flat but luckily, we thank the Lord that no one panicked. 
“There was a young woman crying but quietly otherwise everyone just did as they were told,” she said. 
“My son and I are okay. He’s quite angry; I think it might be a delayed reaction. The Crisis Team were quick and supportive. The Spur staff were amazing,” said the mother. 
Marshall Security’s spokesman Kyle van Reenen said the firm also responded to the scene yesterday.
He said three robbers entered the restaurant and the complex’s security, who were alerted to the robbery in progress, closed the gates. 
Van Reenen said the robbers had to abandon a Toyota Corolla they had arrived in because of the locked gates. 
“Two jumped (over) the gate firing at security as they fled on foot. The third suspect couldn’t jump over the gate and was arrested by security and members of the public,” said Van Reenen. 
It is understood that the other two robbers then hijacked a Hyundai i20 in which they fled.
The Hyundai apparently belonged to a student from a nearby college who was quite traumatised as the robbers reportedly wanted to take him with when they hijacked his car. 
The hijack victim and restaurant patrons were given trauma assistance from the Durban North Umhlanga Crisis Team. 
Van Reenen also said it is believed that the Toyota Corolla that had been abandoned by the robbers was stolen during an incident in Isipingo last year but this could not be confirmed by the police yesterday. 
Police spokesperson Lieutenant Colonel Thulani Zwane confirmed the incident and said the robbers and taken an undisclosed amount of cash from the premises. 
Zwane said a case of business robbery and hijacking was open for investigation. 
Spur customer service yesterday said they were aware of the robbery and were leaving it to police to investigate.