Police Minister Fikile Mbalula announced that reinforcements would be sent to bolster efforts in investigating and preventing political killings in KwaZulu-Natal.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
Speaking at the SAPS training academy in Chatsworth on Monday, Mbalula said officers from the national detective branch and the Hawks had joined the provincial team to enhance interventions by KZN police and provincial leadership.
Mbalula said efforts by KZN SAPS and the provincial leadership had yielded positive results, including the recovery of weapons and ammunition and engagements were being held to bring about stability in affected areas.
But despite the interventions, the killings continued, he said, citing last week’s murder of a councillor in Umzimkhulu. 
He said the new team would also be able to call on the national intervention unit and national task force if necessary.
“This team is mandated to immediately attend to, investigate and prosecute all those cases. They are to ensure those who are responsible for these crimes are arrested, bail is opposed and they are prosecuted as speedily as possible to ensure deterrence and to instil public confidence and stability,” he added.
Police are investigating 33 political murders in the province since January last year. 
He said in many of these cases, investigations had been completed, cases were ready for trial and bail had been successfully opposed.
“The killing of political leaders in KZN has reached appalling levels which should be condemned in the strongest possible way. We condemn the use of violence as a way of settling differences.
“Only a criminal masquerading as an activist will kill for political power,” Mbalula added.
Transport, Community Safety and Liaison MEC Mxolisi Kaunda, welcomed the reinforcements. 
“We commit ourselves to mobilising communities to support police. We want to reposition KZN as a stable province,” he added.
Speaking on gender-based violence, Mbalula said the ministry of police was going to launch a programme of action but called on public participation for help.
He also called on men to intervene when they witnessed abuse. 
“It is us, men in our communities who must protect our women, intervene and involve the law and the case must be attended to.”