Durban - A high-ranking official from the Lesotho embassy has become the latest victim of “knockers” – criminals who target people leaving banks after having made large withdrawals – in Durban.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
According to a police source, the woman was shot at during the Friday morning incident but she narrowly escaped serious injury, with the bullet grazing her head.
A total of R25 000 in cash was believed to have been stolen.
Police spokeswoman Captain Nqobile Gwala said the incident took place at 11.35am.
“The victim was coming from the bank after having withdrawn money,” she said. “When she jumped out of the vehicle at their offices at Beach Grove, the victim and her driver were accosted by three armed suspects”.
She said shots were fired and that the woman sustained injuries. She was taken to hospital for medical attention.
Gwala did not confirm how much money was taken, and would only say: “They took an undisclosed amount of cash in an envelope.”
A case of armed robbery was opened at Durban Central SAPS.
In November, knockers shot and killed a man who had withdrawn cash from the FNB branch in Pinetown. 
Three men – armed with rifles – followed him from the bank and attacked him at the Umdoni Centre.
Police earlier this year issued a statement warning members of the public to refrain from withdrawing large sums of cash. 
“They put themselves at risk of being killed by ruthless thugs who target people withdrawing large amounts of cash from the banks. They should consider the safer options, such as electronic transfers or internet banking,” said the KwaZulu-Natal Acting Provincial Commissioner, Major General Bheki Langa.
The warning was issued after a 48-year-old woman withdrew an extremely large amount of cash from a bank in an eManzimtoti shopping mall on February 10 and proceeded to another mall in Umbilo. 
“While at the parking lot, she was attacked by four unknown suspects who at gunpoint robbed her of the cash and two cellphones before fleeing the scene in their getaway vehicle,” read the statement.
Police warned about gangs targeting people carrying cash. 
They appealed to anyone who might have information about such crimes to contact their local police station or Crime Stop on 08600 10111.
The Mercury