Durban - Fifty years ago, a Wentworth-based team, Leeds United, was born. I had watched Leeds United play, and keeping company with some players and supporters of yore got me interested in telling their story. And once I opened the lid on Leeds, I could not stop looking. Photographs, trophies, beautiful memories, deep wounds that refuse to heal. At the exact time that so many living places were being destroyed under mass relocation programmes, this quest for identity had to find surrogates. This is part of the reason for the fanatical support Leeds United received from the people of Wentworth, an apartheid-imposed coloured township on the outskirts of Durban. Perhaps that is also why the friendships borne in hardship and want are the most powerful. There are two anecdotal stories that tell of the power of Leeds United to capture the imagination of an economically distressed community driven by gang violence and petty crime.One is that when Leeds United played at Curries Fountain – the “Mecca of non-racial sport” – a stadium 15km away in the city centre, the number of house burglaries in Wentworth increased, for the crooks knew that the place had emptied out, and the houses could be empty, too.The second is that warring Wentworth gangs, known for their deadly attacks on each other, united in support whenever Leeds played. Like a church might be a sanctuary within which the Mafia would not commit any violence, so, too, were the soccer grounds during a Leeds United match.Added to this was the way Leeds supporters were always bringing something new to the ground. There were Leeds cushions. And then there was the Leeds mascot, courtesy of Skiddo Joseph and his sister Lorna Petersen, the chairlady of the supporters club. Almost three decades later, she remembers: "We had a dog, Rex. He was our mascot. We gave him a green outfit that went over his back. He ran on the field before the team, carrying a Leeds flag in his mouth. He was so disciplined. He would run on before the team took the field, and then politely run off and take his place with one of my family members. Rex was even a scout and had a full scout uniform. At the games, he wore a green jacket with 'Leeds' on it. Rex died of old age."When things deteriorated in Wentworth (jobs drying up in Sasol and textile factories, families disintegrating, gang violence and drugs, middle-class exodus), soccer became a major resource. Jordi  Pujol’s words about the Barcelona football team are prescient in thinking about the impact of Leeds: "Barça is like other folkloric manifestations of our people – a reserve we can draw on when other sources dry out, when the doors of normality are closed to us."By the early 1970s, a number of soccer clubs had emerged in Wentworth. A long-time resident of Wentworth, Bernard Whitby, was among the people who recruited the best local players into Leeds United. While the origins of the name are contested, the dominant version is that the name came from a street name in nearby Congella. The first years were a revelation. Affiliating to Durban South Football Association, Leeds made a clean sweep of all 11 trophies they competed for. The very first team  included the likes of Colin Paul, who earned the nickname “Stormy”, Wilfred Phillips (Kaapie) and Marshall Justine (Psycho).The following year saw the inclusion of the likes of Lesly “Fishy” Titus, Ronnie Roach and Geoff Petersen. In 1969, goalkeeper Eddie McKnight joined, giving the team solidity in defence. Leeds’ growing fame was to have its down side, however. In 1970, professional clubs came hunting. Pivotal players like the Peters brothers went to Berea and Roach, Paul and Phillips went to Aces United. But this seemed to have little impact, as Wentworth kept producing talented new players keen to make their mark with Leeds.As a sign of their continuing ability to perform at the highest level, Leeds won, in 1974, the biggest tournament hosted by local club D’Alberton Callies, held over the Easter weekend. In that year, the club was playing in the Grand Challenge League. Some of the province’s most powerful teams like Spearman Lads (known as Leeds’ hoodoo team), Motherwell, Dimes United, Santos, Young Springboks, Port Shepstone United, Young Aces and Chatsworth Royals played in this league. It was also the year the dynamic trio of Dennis Petersen, Keith Bezuidenhout and Obed Petersen signed up. The following year, arguably Leeds’ most iconic player, Gary Goldstone, entered the dressing room. The coach at the time Leeds turned professional in the early 1980s was the celebrated Blondie Campbell. The “big” names of the era slip quickly off the tongue and people can point out the houses where players lived or still live. Dennis Petersen, born in 1950, and still living in Wentworth, was known as the “hat-trick” man. He played on both wings but could also be a very effective striker.Gary Goldstone was a midfielder but could double as a striker. If Petersen and Goldstone were knitted together at the hip, swinging between left and right wing, only to meet up at centre forward, their approach to life was lived out at opposite ends of the pitch. When Petersen and Goldstone joined Leeds United in 1975, it was to prove to be two golden years for the club, and they quickly became one of the most successful amateur sides of the 1970s. Goldstone recalls their nickname, the “Green Mambas”: "Somebody had given us that name. They said we strike like a mamba." Petersen and fellow Leeds stalwart Goldstone shared a soccer pitch and a bond that has lasted over five decades. Playing together in 1975, Leeds United were so good that Petersen remembers them playing the glamorous professional side of Berea: "We played Berea twice, and we beat them twice. Berea was a professional club and Leeds was amateurs. It just shows you what a team Leeds was. We worked hard. We trained hard. And we were serious about things. We wanted to prove things. We wanted to do well – and progress. We had a good coach. Blondie Campbell. He was a good coach; very shrewd."In fact, as Goldstone attests, the trophies they accumulated throughout this period showed their prowess: "The Leeds of 1975 and 1976, I would say was one of the best sides I’ve played for. In 1975 we won the League, the Coca-Cola Cup, the Clover Cup, and we represented Durban South and we won the Inter-District Tournament. The whole Leeds team, they represented Durban South… We were practically unbeatable. We won the League in ’75. We won cups in ’75."Many of the players and supporters remember the fact that Leeds’ discerning quality came down to playing with passion, as if their lives depended on it. Losing was taken incredibly hard. It was as if they had read the Spurs great Danny Blanchflower’s sense of what football should be about: "The great fallacy is, first and last, about winning. It’s nothing of the kind. The game is about glory. It is about doing things in style, with a flourish, about going to beat the other lot, not waiting for them to die of boredom."Gary Goldstone epitomised these qualities. For Lloyd Keshwar, a long-time supporter of Leeds, Goldstone was the greatest – not from a goal-scoring point of view, but as a man that controlled the game, a creative guy who made things happen on the field. He could make openings and he could create openings for you to win the game. He was an intelligent player. Twenty years into its existence, the wheels started to come off. Keshwar remembers: "There was no farewell game. There was nothing. It just petered out. In fact, we didn’t even know that it was folding. There was no farewell. It was terrible. It was like a death. For me, I didn’t know what to do with myself on Sundays. I was supporting this team all my life. All of a sudden this thing is gone." The heady days of Leeds United travelling across the country winning trophies and defeating local professional teams is part of a distant past. The memories, though, of a team that united a community are kept alive by a new generation of talent. Fifty years after Leeds was born, the very gifted players that Wentworth still has the capacity to produce inevitably moved to professional clubs. Still, there are signs that soccer is on the up. Young Cavaliers, owned by Petersen’s sister, Lorna, consistently makes the play-offs for a place in the league one below the Premier League. Young Cavaliers' links with Leeds are as clear as a footpath through the veld. The path is a bit overgrown through lack of everyday use, but indelible still. There are the Leeds legends under the pole watching Young Cavaliers. This is not just nostalgia; in investing their hopes in this new generation on the ground where their own desires were rudely smashed, these old Leeds stalwarts find renewed camaraderie. As John Berger reminds us, it is often “on the site of loss that hopes are born”.l Desai is Professor of Sociology at the University of Johannesburg. If you have information on Leeds United, write to him at ashdesai1@gmail.com