Vodacom, in partnership with Rocka, has launched a new TV show called “The NXT LVL” to find South Africa’s next big music superstar.  ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
The show is presented by renowned TV personality Denise Zimba alongside Mzansi’s own music icons and show mentors; DJ Zinhle, Danny K, Euphonik, Riky Rick and Durban’s Big Nuz.
“The (programme) is the only reality show where the winning contestant isn’t forced into a recording deal with a label, but through this show, the winner is given enough resources to record a full album with the best producers in the country.
READ: Online talent search nurtures local singers
The winner is given exposure through a (public relations) agency to help build their brand and a lawyer to assist and draft the contracts pertaining to music rights and royalties. The show is really ‘next level’,” says TV Show Mentor Danny K.
The initiative was launched in 2016 as a platform aimed at giving all young South Africans under the age of 25 the opportunity to follow their passions.
Moreover, it focuses on the development of talent through various platforms that focus on mentorship and coaching.
“To be a successful artist, one requires more than just talent. This is one of many lessons our mentors have given to our five contestants,” says Thami Silwana, Executive Head: Youth Segment.
Jazz singer Zethe Mdletshe is one of the contestants. Picture: Supplied

To be selected to participate in this exciting show, Vodacom customers between the ages 18 to 24 were required to download the ‘My Vodacom App’, subscribe to the NXT LVL platform and upload a video or audio clip of themselves performing.  
From the entries received, only five acts were selected. 
The top five will compete for a prize worth R1 million, which is aimed at supporting them so that they can manage their careers themselves.
The winner will be determined by public vote via SMS, and announced at the live show recording on December 6.

The show will be screened on Mzansi Magic, DSTV channel 161, every Wednesday at 9.30pm and will run for 10 weeks.
 The Mercury