According to the World Health Organisation (WHO), between 10 and 20% of children and adolescents worldwide experience mental health disorders. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
And, said Life Healthcare in a recent statement, half of all mental illnesses began by the age of 14 or the mid-20s.
World Mental Health Day is being observed on October 9.
“In addition, the South African National Youth at Risk Survey, which focuses on children and adolescents between Grade 8 and 11, highlighted that 24% of the youth surveyed had experienced feelings of depression, hopelessness and sadness and that a further 21% had attempted suicide at least once.”
They said that adding to this were the myths, confusion and misinformation about mental illnesses, which caused anxiety, created stereotypes and promoted stigma about depression and suicide. 
Research, they said, showed that there was a major link between depression and suicide. 
“We all feel sadness, loneliness, grief and disappointments at times, and these are normal reactions to life's struggles – but sometimes it is more than just a passing mood and undiagnosed depression can lead to tragedy.”
Professor Lourens Schlebusch, based at Life St Joseph’s at Life Entabeni Hospital in Durban, said: “Teenage suicide is a serious and growing problem. The teenage years can be emotionally turbulent and stressful because teenagers face pressures to succeed and fit in. 
They may struggle with self-esteem issues, self-doubt, and feelings of alienation, academic pressures and relationship problems. For some, this leads to suicidal ideation. Depression is also a major risk factor for teen suicidal behaviour.”
In South Africa, said Schlebusch, suicidal behaviour in the younger generations constituted a major public health problem. 
According to the WHO, worldwide, approximately one death by suicide occurred every forty seconds and one attempt was made every one to three seconds. 
“By 2020, these predictions are expected to increase to one death every 20 seconds and one suicide attempt made every one to two seconds. 
Such figures indicate that, on average, more people globally die annually from suicide than they do during war.”
The Mercury