A 24-year-old Chinese national has been sentenced to four years imprisonment after an airport check revealed 16kg of rhino horn in her luggage.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
The Department of Environmental Affairs said in a statement on Wednesday that Shuangshuang Xue, 24, was arrested at O R Tambo International Airport en route from Lusaka, Zambia to Hong Kong.  
“A suitcase, checked in by the woman, contained 14 pieces of rhinoceros horn with a weight of approximately 16 kg. (It) was intercepted by security screening personnel at the luggage transfer area of the international terminal at OR Tambo International Airport.”
The woman, they said, had been arrested as there had been no permits accompanying the suitcase and its contents.
READ: Six more rhino killed in Hluhluwe-Imfolozi
“The rhinoceros horn (pieces) were confiscated and handed in at the Forensic Science Laboratory of the South African Police Service (SAPS), to determine the origin of the rhinoceros horn or possible linkages with other investigations.”
During genetic profiling it was discovered that the 14 pieces were from the White Rhinoceros (Ceratotherium simum), from five different animals, four of which were male. 
“None of the 14 pieces of rhino horn could be linked to any poaching incidents or registered stock pile.”
READ: Suspects' shirts 'drenched in blood'
The Minister of Environmental Affairs, Dr Edna Molewa, welcomed the sentence handed down to the Chinese national at the Kempton Park Regional Court on October 12.
She had pleaded guilty on charges related to rhino horn smuggling.
The department said that the National Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No. 10 of 2004) (NEMBA), required that the original documentation from the country of origin must accompany a consignment. 
“If there is no such original accompanying documentation, an import permit issued in terms of NEMBA and in accordance with the provisions of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES), is required.”
The Mercury