DURBAN mechanical engineer Adrian Padt has carved out a growing export market for his specialised, locally manufactured heating and cooling inventions that are in demand across the continent.Padt, who graduated with a Bachelor of Technology in Mechanical Engineering from the Durban University of Technology in 1994, started his business ACON CC in 1999 after working for Smiths Manufacturing in Pinetown for five years. He initially focused only on designing highly specialised air-conditioning units, supplying international ambulance and military vehicle OEMs (Original Equipment Manufacturers), which he exports to countries including Jordan and Oman. He later opened Rocket Works after inventing a clean-burning wood stove that has taken the continent by storm, although it is only being launched on the local retail market on Friday. The stove invention started when Padt sat down and deconstructed the design of a honeycomb, and used elements of the structure to patent a simple DIY building system that birthed his company, Honeycomb Homes in 2006.“We developed a very simple modular building system, but we were quite naive at the time because we did not have a core focus for the market, whether it be industrial or RDP housing or rural, because you can basically use it for anything,” Padt said.“We patented a design that uses three lengths of steel, so you can make a lot of the same lengths for use across the board, for building a home, a greenhouse, a hanger or a shed,” he said.“We constructed quite a few schools in the Eastern Cape and game reserve lodgings, and we realised there was more to the home than just the structure – it was about the water, the food and permaculture, so I spent a couple of years developing solar heaters, wind turbines and products around the house,” he said.“But we realised after immersing ourselves into self-sustainability that 90% of the basic energy requirement was for cooking, so we developed a little stove. We didn’t realise there was a market for the stove but we had already developed it and would give it away free with the homes,” he said.But then orders started coming in from the University of Cape Town to distribute to poor communities, and from non-profit organisations. Padt’s stove has a combustion efficiency of 98%.“We applied engineering thermodynamics and basic insulation to a very basic combustion principle. Smoke is unburned fuel, so if you burn the smoke you get better efficiency and combustion. In order to burn smoke efficiently you need to increase the temperature of combustion, and if you introduce high temperature air around the smoke you will burn it very efficiently. Air enters the side of the stove and rises up to enter flutes, which ignites the smoke. It’s the cleanest-burning woodstove on the market,” Padt said. He soon realised there was a market for the stoves, and in 2014 he set his focus on building the energy-efficient wood stoves with some financial assistance for research and development from Trade and Investment KZN.“The majority of our orders until now have been from NGOs and NPOs. We have sold 85 000 of these in 21 countries, and mostly for a UN/World Bank-financed market,” he said.“We have sold very few in South Africa because the government supplies electricity. Here there isn’t a culture for woodstoves, but across the border in Mozambique, Malawi and Zimbabwe you find charcoal and wood stoves, so it’s far easier for us to sell stoves there,” he said.Padt’s stoves have also been exported to Benin and to South Sudan for the UN’s Food and Agricultural Organisation, to assist refugees there, as well as to Cambodia and Nepal.Rocket Works is soon to supply its first order of 29 stoves to Massmart’s distribution centre for local stores.