A cold front moved over the country on Wednesday morning resulting in windy, rainy and cold conditions. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
The South African Weather Service said in a statement that severe thunderstorms with a risk of heavy downpours and strong gusty winds were expected over the western parts of North West, western and southern Free State and the eastern half of Eastern Cape on Wednesday. 
“These conditions are expected to spread to the remainder of the Free State and North-West, KwaZulu-Natal, Mpumalanga, Limpopo and Gauteng by Thursday. 
The risk for severe storms remains on Saturday over eastern parts of North West, Gauteng, Mpumalanga and Limpopo.”
LOOK: Hail devastates parts of the KZN Midlands
The conditions are expected to be accompanied by an intense upper trough (extension of a low pressure in the upper portions of the atmosphere) which has resulted in a band of thundershowers through the western and central parts of the country. 
“Some of these thunderstorms are expected to become severe during the course of today until the weekend, as they progressively spread east during the remainder of the week. 
Light snowfalls are also expected on the mountains bordering the Eastern Cape and Lesotho.”

The following impacts might be felt:

Wet and slippery roads;Occasional poor visibility;Strong gusty winds; andHeavy downpours (which might result in flash flooding in places).


Things to note during flooding:

If walking outdoors, avoid crossing rivers and swollen streams where water is above your ankles;Remember that just 15 cm of fast-moving flood water can knock a person off their feet, and a depth of 60 cm feet is enough to float a car;;Never try to walk, swim or drive through fast-moving flood water. Stop, turn around and go another way;Listen to the special warnings on radio and/or television;Never drive into water covering the road. You would not know how deep it is or if the road has been washed away;If the vehicle stalls, leave it immediately and seek higher ground; andBe especially cautious at night when it is harder to recognise flood danger.

 
The Mercury