Brigadier Hangwani Mulaudzi, the spokesperson for the Directorate for Priority Crime Investigation, which is also known as the Hawks, provided the following response after world-renowned scientist Professor Salim Abdool Karim made an appeal for the crime-fighting body and the National Prosecuting Authority to act against corruption:
We are aware of
the public opinion
that the Directorate
for Priority
Crime Investigation (DPCI) is
not investing time and energy
in relation to allegations of
fraud, corruption and money
laundering against the Gupta
family. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
That perception has now been compounded by media reports that the US’ FBI and the British FCA are both going to probe, or are probing, relatives of the same family on the same allegations in their respective countries.

That perception has embedded itself to the extent that South Africans have divorced themselves from the reality that there is a lot of work that needs to be done, and is currently ongoing. Corruption is always linked and can be syndicated.
Also read: World famous scientist demands action on corruption

It must be understood that we have to start from the beginning, since the alleged corruption took place over a period of time. 

Investigating corruption is very time-consuming and resource intensive. Corruption is one of the most difficult crimes to investigate. There is often no crime scene, no fingerprints, no witness to follow up. It is by its nature a very secretive crime.

It is must be understood that all corruption investigations should be conducted covertly and confidentially, to reduce the opportunities for compromise and interference.

South African law prohibits the DPCI, the media and anyone else from disclosing any details of an investigation until overt action such as arrests have taken place. It must be accepted as a balance between press freedom and effective law enforcement. 

Much as we understand that the South African people deserve those details in a case of intense public interest, our hands are tied. 

We also understand the intense public debate in the wake of the allegations, we can assure the public that these investigations are being done competently, honestly, independently with no outside influence of any kind.

We are aware that there are many opinions expressed by people, but they are unfortunately not party to the investigations as complainants. Their opinions might be relevant; however, we are unable to share any restricted information - it is the right thing to do.

The DPCI always strives to be one of the most professional law enforcement agencies in the country.  However, the public has often accused the DPCI of being a slow-moving bureaucracy, but in the high-profile world of enforcement, that image is not altogether accurate.

A  single case can extend to one year and beyond, complicated by many factors that accompany any investigative process. 

However, despite the complexities, the DPCI is dedicated to its purpose. 

We boast investigators who have high integrity and who adhere strictly to the rule of confidentiality, act fairly and justly in the discharge of their duties, respect the rights of others, including suspects, and never abuse their power. 

They continue to be vigilant, innovative and committed to spend long hours criss-crossing the entire country to complete their investigations, and are the single most important ingredient of success at the DPCI.

Our resolve to investigate these cases remains, and together with the NPA  we are striking the right balance to bring those who will be fingered in this investigation to book. 

Importantly, we also need to strike the right balance between effective law enforcement and protection of human rights and privacy.
The Mercury