Since the initial call for drought aid was raised in early September, truckloads of grass bales have been delivered to struggling farmers in the Eastern Cape from KwaZulu-Natal, along with four truckloads of yellow maize and a 34-tonne load of molasses. ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
And, in addition to this, said the KZN Agricultural Union (Kwanalu) in a statement on Thursday, there were 72 truckloads of grass, two of yellow maize and one more load of molasses ready to be transported.
Farmers in the Eston, Mid-Illovo and Richmond areas of the province were praised by the president of Agri Eastern Cape Doug Stern for this “overwhelming and unbelievable” level of support.
He had been speaking at a meeting of the Mid-Illovo Farmers’ Association (MIFA), the Beaumont Eston Farmers’ Association (BEFA) and the Richmond Agricultural Society (RAS) held last month.
READ: Drought pushes farmers to suicide
Stern explained how the drought had not only caused an agricultural and financial crisis but had also had an impact on the South African economy. 
“And, with the Eastern Cape accounting for a third of all livestock in the country, this is now a national crisis.”
He said: “This is the third consecutive year that the province has had way below average levels of rainfall. As a result, our farmers have had to drastically reduce their stock levels in order to survive and, in trying to keep what stock they do have alive, they have now exhausted all funds available to them to keep afloat.”
READ: KZN farmers donate feed after Cape fire
One of the people leading the charge of the aid initiative in Mid-Illovo was farm manager MJ Hillhouse.
His efforts, and those of other farmers, were noted by the union’s chief executive Sandy La Marque.
“Everyone can sympathise with the plight of farmers in the Eastern Cape who have been so badly affected by the drought and it is our farming communities across KZN who continue to do us proud at every turn with their selfless commitment to assisting those in need regardless of the demands on their own time and pockets,” La Marque said.
For further information on Kwanalu, visit their website.
The Mercury