Proper hydration is vital for good health and well-being and can affect one’s mood, concentration and performance negatively, and has recently also been linked to an increased risk of chronic diseases.ADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads
The Nutritional Information Centre at Stellenbosch University (NICUS) has compiled the following guide to help consumers make the best choices about what and how much to drink.
 
Aside from water, what else do South African adults enjoy drinking?
Fluid intake in healthy adults is regulated by thirst. Water is an essential nutrient for life and is considered the ideal drink to quench thirst and ensure hydration. Ironically, it is often ignored in dietary recommendations.
Despite the benefits of water, many people prefer other drinks such as soft drinks, fruit juice, coffee, tea, milk or sport drinks. These beverages could contribute to the daily energy intake. For instance, a glass of regular sweetened carbonated cool drink contains at least 418 kJ, while a glass of artificially sweetened cool drink contains less than 5 kJ, making the latter a far better choice for an overweight or inactive adult.
 
How much water should we be drinking?
The USA’s National Research Council (NRC) recommends a daily water intake of about 1ml/kcal energy expenditure, which translates to about eight glasses of water per day. This recommendation is based on an average-weight male (70 kg). However, no single formula fits every individual or every situation, since water intake recommendations also depend on other factors such as activity, humidity, climate, body temperature and body composition.
 
Why is water the best possible choice? 
Despite the focus on hydration and de-hydration in many official reports, some studies have shown that plain water consumption is associated with better diets, better health behaviours, and a lower burden of chronic disease. It provides no additional energy, which makes it ideal for overweight or inactive adults. It also provides variable amounts of minerals such as calcium, magnesium and fluoride, depending on its source.

The Mercury