No matter what season it is, night markets are a great place to relax, meet up with friends, be with family and indulge in some shopping and foodie delights. Unlike the day-time markets, they are more exciting, too. Due to their  popularity, it makes sense that Pietermartizburg’s Soofie Night Market, has become a must-attend event, every time it’s on. Considered as Pietermaritzburg’s first  night market and having opened in March, this night market features local entrepreneurs and established vendors.“We have a wide selection of food and delicacy stalls; Spur on Wheels, The Rolling Pin who will be serving their famous “naanwiches” and introducing their tandoori gourmet pizzas. Prawn Star  will be specialising in their original crumbed prawns and will also introduce their prawn pine boat which consists of Argentinian prawns served with sauce and pine salsa. They also will be serving pure wagyu beef sliders,” said event administrator Rif’at Soofi. PMB night market offers food for every palette, pictured here are their famous Wagyu beef sliders.Other favourites include Roti and Chai,who will be serving their popular paneer tikka masala wrap; Gourmet Girls, a PMB pop-up, with preggo burgers, chow mein and Haji Ali sandwiches; Yusma’licious which makes home-made Italian Gelato with flavours such as Milky-bar and Smarties, crème brulee and butter popcorn; Pani Puri, a famous Indian street snack which consists of hollow puri, fried to a crisp and filled with potato, chickpeas and chutney, and lastly Mo G’s restaurant, where chef Mo will be serving his famous pulled confit duck and mushroom ravioli.  Soofi said people need to go to the market to support local business and enjoy hand crafted food that you will definitely not find in your mother’s kitchen. It’s not just about food –  get crafty and hand-sewn items at affordable prices for sale, get a feel of lit up Middle Eastern markets and treat yourself and your family to an amazing outing. Clothing stalls, make-up, artists and fun- filled activities for children will also be available. The night market happens once a month and is held at 189 East Street from 6pm to 11pm.